---
id: changes-to-trial-protocol
title: 10. Changes to trial protocol
summary:
    text: Important changes to the trial after it commenced including any outcomes or analyses that were not pre-specified, with reason.
---

## What to write

Important changes to the trial after it commenced, including any outcomes or analyses that were not prespecified, with reason

## Examples

"The original primary endpoint was all-cause mortality, but, during a
masked analysis, the data and safety monitoring board noted that overall
mortality was lower than had been predicted and that the study could not
be completed with the sample size and power originally planned. The
steering committee therefore decided to adopt co-primary endpoints of
all-cause mortality (the original primary endpoint), together with
all-cause mortality or cardiovascular hospital admissions (the first
prespecified secondary endpoint)."[@ref170]

"As described in the published protocol paper, a protocol amendment was
made to revise the sample size in response to new information on the
minimal clinically important difference of the primary outcome measure,
the Patient-Oriented Eczema Measure (POEM). Our original sample size
used a POEM score for minimal clinically important difference of 3,
which was based on research carried out in secondary care among people
with moderate or severe eczema. Fresh evidence, however, suggested that
a change in POEM score of 2.1 to 2.9 represents a change likely to be
beyond measurement error. A protocol amendment was therefore made to
change the target sample size for the trials based on seeking to detect
a difference in POEM score of 2.5 points between groups, increasing the
target sample size from 200 to 303 for each trial."[@ref171]

## Explanation

A protocol for a randomised trial serves as the foundation for planning,
conduct, reporting, and appraisal, specifying in detail how the trial
will be conducted. There may be deviations from the original protocol,
as it is impossible to predict every possible change in circumstances
during the course of a trial. Some trials will therefore have important
changes to the methods after trial commencement. There are many reasons
for deviations from the initial study protocol; for example, changes
could be due to external information becoming available from other
studies, or internal financial difficulties, or lower than anticipated
recruitment rates. In some trials, an independent data monitoring
committee will have as part of its remit the possibility of recommending
protocol changes based on seeing unblinded data. Authors should report
the nature and timing of protocol changes because changes made at
different times (eg, before or after breaking the blinding) might be
associated with different risks of bias.

Authors should report all major changes to the trial after it commenced
indicating the reason for the changes and when the changes
occurred.[@ref172] Such changes might affect the trial methods, such as
the randomisation ratio, eligibility criteria, interventions, outcomes,
method of analysis or duration of follow-up; or might affect the trial
conduct, such as dropping a trial site with poor data quality.[@ref173]

Some trials are set up with a formal adaptive design, which allows
pre-planned changes to an ongoing trial without compromising the
validity of conclusions.[@ref174] It is therefore essential to
distinguish pre-planned changes from unplanned changes that may also
occur. Such adaptive trial design modifications are usually to the
sample size and number of treatment groups, and can lead to decisions
being made more quickly and with more efficient use of resources than
would be possible with traditional, non-adaptive parallel group trials.
Specific guidance has been developed for reporting trials with a formal
adaptive design; authors could consult this for more detailed
information.[@ref174]

Most trials record multiple outcomes, with the risk that results will be
reported for only a selected subset. Prespecification and reporting of
completely defined primary and secondary outcomes for both benefits and
harms (item 14) should remove such a risk. In some trials, however,
circumstances require a change in the way an outcome is assessed, the
designation of outcomes as primary or secondary or even, as in the
example above, a switch to a different outcome. For example, there may
be external evidence from other trials or systematic reviews suggesting
the time point for the primary outcome might not be appropriate; or
recruitment or the overall event rate in the trial may be lower than
expected.[@ref170] Changing an endpoint based on unblinded data are much
more problematic, although may be specified in the context of an
adaptive trial design.[@ref174]

Whether the modifications are explicitly part of the trial design or in
response to changing circumstances, it is essential that they are fully
reported and the reason for the change explained to help the reader
interpret the results. Such information is not always reported. A
comparison of protocols and publications of 102 randomised trials found
that 62% of trial reports had at least one primary outcome that was
changed, introduced, or omitted compared with the protocol.[@ref51]
Primary outcomes also differed between protocols and publications for
40% of a cohort of 48 trials funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research.[@ref175] None of these subsequent 150 trial reports mentioned,
let alone explained, changes from the protocol. Similar results from
other studies have been reported in a systematic review of empirical
studies, comparing trial registers or protocols to published trial
reports.[@ref176]
