---
id: trial-setting
title: 11. Trial Setting
summary:
    text: Settings (eg, community, hospital) and locations (eg, countries, sites) where the trial was conducted.
---

## What to write

Settings (eg, community, hospital) and locations (eg, countries, sites) where the trial was conducted

## Examples

"The study was conducted in paediatric diabetes services experienced in
the use of CSII \[continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion\], in nine
University and six local hospitals within the NHS in England and
Wales."[@ref177]

"Setting: One large health board area with a materially deprived, inner
city population in the west of Scotland, United Kingdom. Although
described as a single centre, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has the
largest health board population (1.2m) in the United Kingdom. It is
spread over a wide geographical area including severely materially
deprived post-industrial areas as well as some more affluent
communities. Maternity booking and antenatal care are provided in both
hospital and local healthcare settings. Delivery (13 844 infants in
2013\[reference\]) takes place in three major maternity
hospitals."[@ref178]

## Explanation

Along with the eligibility criteria for participants (item 12a) and the
description of the interventions (item 13), information on the settings
and locations where the trial was conducted is crucial to enable readers
to judge the applicability and generalisability of a trial. Were
participants recruited from primary, secondary, or tertiary healthcare,
or from the community? Healthcare institutions vary greatly in their
organisation, experience, and resources and the baseline risk for the
condition under investigation. Other aspects of the setting, including
the social, economic, and cultural environment, might also affect a
study's external validity.

Authors should report the number and type of settings and describe the
care providers involved. They should report the locations in which the
study was carried out, including the country, city if applicable, and
immediate environment (eg, community, general practice, hospital
outpatient clinic, or inpatient unit). In particular, it should be
reported whether the trial was carried out in one site (single centre
trials) or several sites (multicentre trials). The description of the
setting should provide enough information so that readers can judge
whether the results of the trial could be relevant to their own setting.
The environment in which the trial is conducted might differ
considerably from the setting in which the trial's results are later
used to guide practice and policy.[@ref179; @ref180] Authors should
also report any other information about the settings and locations that
could have influenced the observed results.
