---
id: eligibility-criteria-participants
title: 12a. Eligibility criteria for participants
summary:
    title: 12a. Participants
    text: Eligibility criteria for participants.
---

## What to write

Eligibility criteria for participants

## Example

"Patients aged 18 years or older were recruited from 20 UK National
Health Service (NHS) trusts. Patients were eligible if they had a
diagnosis of shoulder pain attributable to a rotator cuff disorder (eg,
cuff tendonitis, impingement syndrome, tendinopathy, or rotator cuff
tear) that had started within the past 6 months. We used the diagnostic
criteria set out in the British Elbow and Shoulder Society (BESS)
guidelines. Patients were excluded if they had a history of significant
shoulder trauma (eg, dislocation, fracture, or full-thickness tear
requiring surgery), neurological disease affecting the shoulder, other
shoulder conditions (eg, inflammatory arthritis, frozen shoulder, or
glenohumeral joint instability), received corticosteroid injection or
physiotherapy for shoulder pain in the past 6 months, or were being
considered for surgery. Detailed criteria are in the protocol."[@ref181]

## Explanation

A comprehensive description of the eligibility criteria used to select
the trial participants is needed to help readers interpret the study. In
particular, all inclusion and exclusion criteria should be reported to
judge to whom the results of a trial apply---that is, the trial's
generalisability (applicability) and relevance to clinical or public
health practice (item 30).[@ref179] A description of the method of
recruitment, such as by referral or self-selection (eg, through
advertisements) is also important in this context. Because they are
applied before randomisation, eligibility criteria do not affect the
internal validity of a trial, but they are central to its external
validity.

Typical and widely accepted selection criteria relate to the nature and
stage of the condition or disease being studied, the exclusion of
persons thought to be particularly vulnerable to harm from the study
intervention, and to issues required to ensure that the study satisfies
legal and ethical norms. The informed consent of study participants, for
example, is typically required in intervention studies. Where relevant,
it is important to describe whether sex and/or gender were taken into
account in the design of the trial, including whether there was adequate
representation of men and women (or diverse genders), and justify the
reasons for any exclusion.[@ref182]

Despite their importance, eligibility criteria are often not reported
adequately. For example, in an analysis of 283 reports of trials
published between 1994 and 2006 in high impact general medical journals,
reporting of exclusion criteria was often poor and incomplete: 84% of
published trials contained at least one poorly justified exclusion
criteria, and in 61% more than a quarter of the trial's exclusion
criteria were poorly justified.[@ref183] Any differences in eligibility
criteria between the trial protocol and final publication should also be
highlighted and reasons for any discrepancies reported. A review of 52
protocols and 75 subsequent full publications submitted to a German
medical ethics committee between 2000 and 2006 identified modifications
to the eligibility criteria for 85% of trial publications, with 41% of
final publications containing newly added criteria.[@ref184] Similar
deficiencies have been found in other studies.[@ref185; @ref186]