---
id: eligibility-criteria-sites-individuals
title: 12b. Eligibility criteria – other
summary:
    title: 12b. Other
    text: If applicable, eligibility criteria for sites and for individuals delivering the interventions (eg, surgeons, physiotherapists).
---

## What to write

If applicable, eligibility criteria for sites and for individuals delivering the interventions (eg, surgeons, physiotherapists)

## Example

"All participating centres . . . were major neurosurgical centres,
treating large numbers of patients after aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage (SAH), each centre treating between 60 and 200 cases
annually . . . Centres had to have expertise in both neurosurgical and
endovascular management of ruptured aneurysms. Only accredited
neurosurgeons with experience of aneurysm surgery were permitted to
manage patients in the trial. Endovascular operators had to have done a
minimum of 30 aneurysm treatment procedures, before they were permitted
to treat patients in the trial".[@ref187]

## Explanation

For all types of trials, it is important to define the eligibility
criteria for clinical sites, and to consider the characteristics of the
treatment providers who will provide both the experimental and
comparator interventions.[@ref22; @ref188] Evidence suggests that
patient outcomes can be associated with hospital and care provider
volume.[@ref188] A systematic review of 135 trials found that 71%
observed a positive association between hospital volume and outcomes,
and 70% observed an association between care provider volume and
outcomes.[@ref189] Different levels of expertise of care providers in
each intervention group can bias treatment effect estimates.[@ref190]
Furthermore, an intervention might be found to be safe and effective in
a trial performed in high volume sites by high volume care providers but
could have different results in low volume sites. For example, in an
analysis of Medicare National Claim files of 167 208 patients who had
undergone coronary stent surgery, patients treated by high volume
physicians and at high volume sites experienced better outcomes than
those treated by low volume physicians at low volume sites.[@ref191]
Similar studies show that in most non-pharmacological trials, care
provider expertise and site volume will influence treatment
effects.[@ref192; @ref193; @ref194]

Eligibility criteria for care providers and sites are often poorly
reported. A systematic review of randomised trials in surgery found that
the setting and the site volume of activity were reported in only 7% and
3% of articles, respectively. Eligibility criteria were reported for
care providers in 41% of the articles, and the number of care providers
performing the intervention was reported in 32%.[@ref195] A careful
description of care providers involved in the trial, as well as details
of the sites in which participants were treated, helps readers appraise
the risk of bias and the applicability of the results.[@ref22; @ref188]
Eligibility criteria for sites typically relate to site volume for the
procedure under investigation or similar procedures. Eligibility
criteria for care providers might include professional qualifications,
years in practice, number of interventions performed, skill as assessed
by level of complication when performing the intervention, and specific
training before trial initiation. Exclusion criteria should be justified
because they will influence the applicability of the trial
results.[@ref188]

