---
id: intervention-and-comparator
title: 13. Intervention and comparator
summary:
    text: Intervention and comparator with sufficient details to allow replication. If relevant, where additional materials describing the intervention and comparator (eg, intervention manual) can be accessed.
---

## What to write

Intervention and comparator with sufficient details to allow replication. If relevant, where additional materials describing the intervention and comparator (eg, intervention manual) can be accessed

## Examples

"Each sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine course consisted of three tablets
containing 500 mg of sulfadoxine and 25 mg of pyrimethamine (unbranded
generic sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine, Medopharm, Chennai, India; quality
controlled by Durbin, Hayes, UK) given as a single oral dose for 1 day
(appendix p 2). Each dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine course was dosed
according to the bodyweight of each participant and consisted of three
to five tablets containing 40 mg of dihydroartemisinin and 320 mg of
piperaquine (Alfasigma, Bologna, Italy), given orally once a day for 3
consecutive days. Each dose of azithromycin consisted of two tablets
containing 500 mg (Universal Corporation, Nairobi, Kenya) given orally
once daily for 2 consecutive days (cumulative dose of 2 g) at the same
time as the first and second daily dose of
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine at enrolment. The placebo tablets were
also provided by Universal Corporation and had the same appearance as
active azithromycin (appendix p 2). The first daily dose was
administered in the study clinic under the direct supervision of the
study staff, combined with a slice of dry bread or a biscuit. The daily
doses on the second and third days were self-administered at home at
approximately the same time of the day and in a similar manner as the
first dose taken under observation in the clinic."[@ref196]

"The experimental group received 6 sessions of standard OMT (osteopathic
manipulative treatment), and the control group 6 sessions of sham OMT,
each session at 2-week intervals. For both experimental and control
groups, each session lasted 45 minutes and consisted of 3 periods: (1)
interview focusing on pain location, (2) full osteopathic examination,
and (3) intervention consisting of standard or sham OMT. Briefly, in
both groups, practitioners assessed 7 anatomical regions for dysfunction
(lumbar spine, root of mesentery, diaphragm, and atlantooccipital,
sacroiliac, temporomandibular, and talocrural joints) and applied sham
OMT to all areas or standard OMT to those that were considered
dysfunctional. All health care providers were board-certified
nonphysician, nonphysiotherapist osteopathic practitioners (RÃ©pertoire
National de la Certification Professionnelle, niveau 1). They all
received a 2-day training according to international standards to
deliver both standard and sham OMT. Full descriptions of osteopathic
practitioner training and interventions are provided in eAppendices 3
and 4 in Supplement 2. In both groups, pharmacological interventions,
nonpharmacological interventions, and spinal surgery were allowed.
Cointerventions were self-reported at 3, 6, and 12 months by use of a
standardized checklist (eAppendix 5 in Supplement 2)."[@ref197]

## Explanation

Complete reporting of the intervention and comparator details is
essential to enable readers to understand the study results and
adequately translate them to clinical practice. Several studies have
shown poor reporting of interventions and comparators in randomised
trials.[@ref195; @ref198; @ref199; @ref200; @ref201; @ref202]
[@ref203; @ref204; @ref205; @ref206] Authors should describe each
intervention thoroughly, including control interventions, or use of
placebo procedure.[@ref207; @ref208] The description should provide
sufficient detail to allow replication, such as to allow a clinician
wanting to use the intervention to know exactly how to administer the
intervention/comparator that was evaluated in the trial.[@ref198] Key
information includes the different components of the
intervention/comparator, how and when it should be administered, the
intervention/comparator material (ie, any physical or informational
materials used in the intervention/comparator, including those provided
to participants or used in intervention/comparator delivery or in
training of providers and where it can be accessed (eg, online appendix,
URL)); the procedure for tailoring the intervention/comparator to
individual participants, and how fidelity[@ref209] (ie, the extent to
which the intervention/comparator were implemented as planned in the
protocol by care providers) or adherence[@ref209] (ie, the extent to
which trial participants implement the intervention/comparator as
planned in the protocol) were assessed or enhanced ([box
2](#box2){ref-type="boxed-text"}).

::: caption
###### Examples of essential information to be reported for various types of interventions in randomised trials\*[@ref22; @ref23]
:::

#### Drug[@ref23]

-   Generic name

-   Manufacturer

-   Dose

-   Route of administration (eg, oral, intravenous)

-   Timing

-   Titration regimen if applicable

-   Duration of administration

-   Procedure for tailoring the intervention to individual participants

-   Conditions under which interventions are withheld

-   Whether and how adherence of patients to the intervention was
    assessed or enhanced

-   Any physical or informational materials used in the intervention and
    where the materials can be accessed.

#### Rehabilitation, behavioural treatment, education, and psychotherapy, etc[@ref22; @ref23]

-   Qualitative information

    -   Theory/rationale for essential intervention elements

    -   Content of each session

    -   Mode of delivery (individual/group, face to face/remote)

    -   Whether the treatment is supervised

    -   The content of the information exchanged with participants

    -   The materials used to give information

    -   Procedure for tailoring the intervention to individual
        participants

    -   Whether and how the interventions were standardised

    -   Background and expertise of individuals delivering the
        interventions

    -   Whether the same care providers delivered interventions across
        trial groups

    -   Whether and how adherence of individuals delivering the
        interventions to the protocol was assessed or enhanced

    -   Whether and how adherence of patients to the intervention
        protocol was assessed and/or enhanced

    -   Any physical or informational materials used in the intervention
        and where the materials can be accessed.

-   Quantitative information

    -   Intensity of the intervention where appropriate

    -   Number of sessions

    -   Session schedule

    -   Session duration

    -   Duration of each main component of each session

    -   Overall duration of the intervention.

#### Surgery, technical procedure, or implantable device[@ref22]

-   Preoperative care relevant details

-   Intraoperative care relevant details

-   Configuration of any device

-   Postoperative care relevant details

-   Procedure for tailoring the intervention to individual participants

-   Whether and how the interventions were standardised

-   Background and expertise of individuals delivering the interventions

-   Whether the same care providers delivered interventions across trial
    groups

-   Whether and how adherence of individuals delivering the
    interventions to the protocol was assessed or enhanced

-   Any physical or informational materials used in the intervention and
    where the materials can be accessed.

Assessing fidelity and adherence can be complex and vary according to
the intervention/comparator (eg, one-off, short term repeated, long term
repeated). Various deviations to the protocol can occur. For example,
participants might initiate the intervention but then discontinue the
intervention completely and permanently after a specific period of time,
discontinue the intervention temporarily, reduce the dose, or modify the
schedule. If relevant, authors should provide the prespecified
definition for classifying participants as being treated as planned or
not.

In addition, authors should indicate whether criteria were used to guide
intervention/comparator modifications and discontinuations and where
applicable describe these criteria. This information could be
particularly important to evaluate the risk of bias due to deviations
from the intended interventions,[@ref210; @ref211] an important domain
of the risk-of-bias tool developed by Cochrane.[@ref210] Assessing this
domain requires a clear understanding of, and ability to distinguish
between, deviations that occur as planned in the protocol and deviations
that arise due to the experimental context.

The research question (ie, explanatory *v* pragmatic) will affect the
standardisation of the intervention/comparator as well as how adherence
or fidelity is assessed or enhanced. In explanatory trials, the aim is
to estimate treatment effect under ideal circumstances. The
intervention/comparator are usually highly standardised with close
monitoring of fidelity and adherence to the intervention/comparator and
strategies to increase them. In contrast, pragmatic trials aim to
determine treatment effect in clinical conditions. The intervention and
comparator are usually highly flexible, and measurement of fidelity and
adherence are unobstructive with no strategies to maintain or improve
them. Nevertheless, assessing fidelity and adherence to the
intervention/comparator, or at least recording the most important
components of the intervention/comparator, is necessary to understand
what was actually administered to participants. This is particularly
important for complex interventions where diversity in the
implementation of the intervention is expected. For example, in a
pragmatic trial assessing a surgical procedure where the procedure is
left to surgeons' choice, investigators should plan to systematically
record key elements related to pre-operative care, anaesthesia, the
surgical approach, and post-operative care. This information is
essential to provide a relevant description of the intervention that was
actually provided when the trial is completed.

If the control group or intervention group received a combination of
interventions, the authors should provide a thorough description of each
intervention, an explanation of the order in which the combination of
interventions were planned to be introduced or withdrawn, and the
triggers for their introduction if applicable. Some complex
interventions will require the development of specific documentation
(eg, training materials, intervention manuals). Authors should make
these available and indicate where they can be accessed.

If the control group is to receive usual care, it is important to
describe what that constitutes so that readers can assess whether the
comparator differs substantially from usual care in their own
setting.[@ref212] Various approaches could be used: standardising usual
care to be in line with specific guidelines; or asking practitioners to
treat control patients according to their own preference, which could
result in heterogeneity of the care provided particularly between
centres and over time.[@ref213] Usual care can vary substantially across
sites and patients, as well as over the duration of the trial. Further,
it is important to clarify if the experimental group also received usual
care in addition to the experimental intervention, and what actually
differed between the groups. Usual care is frequently incompletely
reported. In a review of 214 paediatric trials, the descriptions of
standard of care were more often incomplete than the description of the
intervention arms within the same study as measured by the TIDieR
checklist (mean 5.81 (standard deviation (SD) 2.13) *v* 8.45 (SD
1.39)).[@ref205]

If the control group is to receive a placebo, specific considerations
need to be accounted for. Some evidence showed that placebos are
insufficiently described.[@ref214] Placebo could have several different
aspects from pills to saline injections or more complex interventions
such as sham interventions (eg, sham surgery) or attention control
interventions. Authors should report the same level of details as
required for the intervention---that is, content of the placebo or
different component of the placebo, how and when it should be
administered, material, procedure for tailoring the placebo to
individual participants, and how fidelity and adherence were assessed or
enhanced.[@ref207] Complete reporting of the placebo is needed to
understand what intervention effect is measured in the trial.[@ref215] A
network meta-analysis of osteoarthritis trials showed that different
placebo interventions (oral, intra-articular, topical, oral and topical)
had different effects and can impact the relative effect estimate of
active treatments.[@ref216]

Further, the trial groups could receive different concomitant care in
addition to the assigned trial interventions. Concomitant care could
impact trial outcomes and bias effect estimates. To facilitate
interpretation of study results and risk-of-bias assessments, authors
should report relevant concomitant care that was allowed or prohibited
where relevant.

Specific guidance has been developed to improve the reporting of
interventions, particularly TIDieR,[@ref23] TIDieR-Placebo for placebo
and sham controls,[@ref207] and the CONSORT extensions for
non-pharmacological treatments.[@ref22] Authors could consult these for
more detailed information.