---
id: harms
title: 15. Harms
summary:
    text: How harms were defined and assessed (eg, systematically, non-systematically).
---

## What to write

How harms were defined and assessed (eg, systematically, non-systematically)

## Examples

"Adverse events (AE) were assessed clinically and analytically at each
monthly follow-up visit. The severity of AE were classified according to
the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria version 4.0.
Following the onset of the first cases, the criteria for considering the
presence of tenosynovitis were established as spontaneous pain that
increased with movement in any tendon insertion with tenderness at that
level and observation of localized inflammatory signs of at least 72
hours in duration . . . Patients were considered to have hepatotoxicity
when they presented alanine transaminase, aspartate aminotransferase, or
bilirubin elevations more than 2 times the upper limit of the normal
range. Toxicity was considered severe, and therefore the drug was
discontinued when symptomatic elevations were more than 3 times or
asymptomatic elevations were more than 5 times the normal levels. All AE
were recorded and additional information was required in case of serious
adverse events."[@ref229]

"Immediate adverse events were assessed by monitoring participants 30
min after injection in the trial centre. All participants were required
to report all local and systemic adverse reactions and adverse events
after the injection using the trial's mobile application. Solicited
adverse reactions were defined as any events that occurred from day zero
to day seven after each injection. Unsolicited adverse reactions were
defined as any adverse reactions which occurred from day eight to day 28
after each injection. The severity of adverse reactions was defined
using the Food and Drug Administration guidance for industry and
toxicity grading scale for healthy adult and adolescent volunteers
enrolled in preventive vaccine clinical trial."[@ref230]

## Explanation

Evaluation and reporting of harms in randomised trials can be useful to
inform decision makers on the benefit-risk balance of an
intervention.[@ref20; @ref36] Randomised trials usually lack power and
sufficient follow-up to adequately estimate harms[@ref231];
nevertheless, they can provide data about harms that can be synthesised
in meta-analyses if adequately reported.[@ref20; @ref36] For example,
the Women's Health Initiative trials on hormone therapy provided
important data on the cardiovascular risk of hormone replacement
therapy.[@ref232]

Harm relates to the unwanted effects of an intervention. According to
the specific context, a given event could be considered for assessing
harm (eg, myocardial infarction in a trial assessing non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs in patients with osteoarthritis) or benefit (eg,
myocardial infarction in a trial assessing aspirin in patients with
cardiovascular risk factors) of an intervention.[@ref232] The use of the
term "harms" is preferred over "safety" to better reflect the negative
effect of interventions.[@ref20]

Despite the importance of having access to data on harms, reporting of
this information is poor.[@ref127; @ref128; @ref233; @ref234] A
review of 184 drug trials published between 2015 and 2016 in four
medical journals with high impact factors showed that 28% did not
provide any details on how harm data were collected and 89% did not
report who decided whether the harm was attributable to the study
drug.[@ref128] An overview of 13 reviews assessing the reporting of
harms in randomised trials using the 2004 CONSORT extension for harms
showed that only 40% of the included trials addressed harms outcomes
with definitions for each and 44% clarified how harms-related
information was collected.[@ref127]

How harms are defined and assessed will affect the results and effect
estimates. Harm can be prespecified or not. They can be systematically
assessed or rely on spontaneous declaration (ie, non-systematically
assessed). To increase the study's power, harm can be aggregated in a
composite outcome (eg, cardiovascular diseases). Some trials implement a
procedure to determine whether harms could be attributed to the
intervention (ie, causality).

For each systematically assessed harm, authors should report the
definition, the measurement variable (eg, name of a validated
questionnaire), and where appropriate, the analysis metric for each
participant (eg, time to event), the summary measure for each trial
group (eg, proportion), and the time point of interest for analysis.
They should describe the procedures for harm assessment including who
did the assessment, whether they were blinded to the treatment
allocated, the assessment time points, and the overall time period for
recording harms. For non-systematically assessed harms, authors should
report the mode of data collection with the time point and overall time
period for recording harms. Nevertheless, non-systematically assessed
harms can be difficult to analyse and interpretation of the results
should be viewed with caution. To overcome this issue, trialists can
code and group events into specific categories. Nevertheless, the lack
of standardisation in data collection could result in selective and
incomplete reporting.[@ref231] Access to individual participant data may
be needed to adequately synthesise this information.[@ref231; @ref235]
[@ref236]

Where appropriate, the process for coding each harm and grading its
severity should be described including who did the coding and severity
grading, and whether they were blinded to the allocated trial group.

If harms outcomes are aggregated (eg, cardiovascular events, serious
events, severe events, withdrawals due to harms, harms imputed to
treatment), authors should describe the process for classifying harms,
including the grouping system used (eg, grading system to define
severity), who did the grouping, and whether they were blinded to the
treatment allocated.[@ref237; @ref238]

The box below summarises the essential
information to be reported related to harms. More detailed information
can be found in the CONSORT extension for harms, which was updated in
2022.[@ref20]

::: {.callout-note collapsed=false}
### Reporting harms in randomised controlled trials

#### Systematically assessed harms

-   Definition and instrument used (eg, name of a validated
    questionnaire)

-   Analysis metric for each participant (eg, time to event); summary
    measure for each trial group (eg, proportion); time point of
    interest for analysis, where appropriate.

#### Procedures for harm assessment, including:

-   Who did the assessment

-   Whether the assessors were blinded to the allocated trial group

-   Assessment time points and the overall time period for recording
    harms

#### Non-systematically assessed harms

-   How data were collected

-   Assessment time points and overall time period for recording harms

#### Coding harms and grading severity

Where appropriate, process for coding each harm and grading its
severity, including:

-   Who did the coding and severity grading, and whether they were
    blinded to the allocated trial group

-   Which coding and severity grading systems were used, if any

-   Assessment time points and overall time period for recording harms

#### Grouping of harms

For grouping of harms by body system, seriousness, severity, withdrawals
(due to harms), and causality:

-   Definitions of grouping categories

-   Who did the grouping, and whether they were blinded to the allocated
    trial group.

:::
