---
id: sample-size-determination
title: 16a. How sample size was determined
summary:
    text: How sample size was determined, including all assumptions supporting the sample size calculation.
---

## What to write

How sample size was determined, including all assumptions supporting the sample size calculation

## Examples

"We expected an improvement in PFS \[progression free survival\], in
favor of avelumab, with a hazard ratio (HR) of 0.58. Considering a fixed
design with a 2-sided α risk of 5% and a power of 80%, 106 events
(progression or death) are needed to demonstrate this difference based
on the Schoenfeld method. With an estimated recruitment rate of 3
patients per month, a follow-up period for each patient of 24 months,
and a percentage of patients lost to follow-up or not evaluable of 15%,
132 patients had to be randomized, and we planned to enroll a total of
66 patients per group."[@ref239]

"The target sample size was 300 (150 per arm) over a 3-and-a-half-year
recruitment period. This was based on an assumed proportion of
individuals with clinically meaningful improvement in VA \[visual
acuity\] (\>10 letters) of 55% in the standard care arm and a 19%
increase in the adjunct group to 75%, with approximately 7% loss to
follow-up, at least 90% power and two-sided 5% type 1 error."[@ref240]

"In order to detect a minimum clinically important difference (MCID) in
mean volume of daily PA \[physical activity\] of 2.1 m g
\[milligravity\] at 12 months, and assuming a standard deviation (SD) of
5.3 m *g*, power of 80%, and a statistical significance level of 5%, a
total of 202 participants were required. Allowing for 20% loss to
follow-up and 20% non-compliance of accelerometer/intervention
attendance meant that at least 338 participants were required (169 per
group). The value of 2.1 m *g* was chosen as it represents an increase
in PA that is equivalent to walking at the threshold between light
intensity and moderate intensity (for example, 4 km per hour) for 30 min
per day or 10--15 min of brisk walking per day."[@ref241]

"Sample size was based on the primary outcome measure, HOS ADL \[hip
outcome score activities of daily living subscale\] at eight months
post-randomisation, and was calculated using a minimum clinically
important difference between groups of 9 points. We estimated the
standard deviation to be 14 points; however, summaries presented at a
planned interim data monitoring meeting found that the standard
deviation was 18 points. A revised calculation (significance level 5%,
power 90%, loss to follow-up 20%) gave a sample size of 214 (107
participants in each group). The data monitoring committee approved the
sample size increase from 120 to 214 participants."[@ref242]

## Explanation

Sample size calculations are a key design component for a trial and need
careful planning. Sample size calculations need to balance ethical and
logistical considerations alongside medical and statistical
considerations so that the scientific question can be reliably and
precisely answered in a timely manner without unnecessarily exposing
individuals to ineffective or harmful interventions. They are generally
based on one primary outcome. A trial should therefore be sufficiently
large to have a high probability (power) of identifying a clinically
important difference of a prespecified size that meets a criterion of
statistical significance, if such a difference exists. The magnitude of
the effect has an inverse relationship with the sample size required for
its detection; that is, larger sample sizes are needed to detect smaller
differences. Moreover, the inverse relationship is not linear: very
small differences require enormous sample sizes to have good power to
detect.

All details on how the sample size was determined should be reported to
allow replication (in principle). Elements of the sample size
calculation that need to be specified are the primary outcome (and time
point) on which the calculation was based (item 14); the anticipated
values for the outcome in each trial group (which implies the clinically
important target difference between the intervention groups) at a
specific time point with rationale or provenance of all quantities,
including any relevant citations; or continuous outcomes, the standard
deviation of the measurements[@ref243]; the statistical test; the α
(type I error) value and whether it is two sided; the statistical power
(or the β (type II error) value); and the resulting target sample size
per trial group (see the box below). Details should
be given of any inflation of the sample size made for attrition or
non-adherence during the study. Reference to any formulas or software
packages used for the sample size calculation should all be reported.
The reporting will have additional considerations for crossover
trials,[@ref167] factorial trials,[@ref138] cluster trials,[@ref168]
multi-arm trials,[@ref166] within-person trials,[@ref245] and
non-inferiority and equivalence trials.[@ref129]

::: {.callout-note collapsed=true}
### DELTA[@ref2] recommended reporting items for the sample size calculation of a randomised controlled trial with a superiority question\*[@ref244]

#### Core items

1.  Primary outcome (and any other outcome on which the calculation is
    based). If a primary outcome is not used as the basis for the sample
    size calculation, state why

2.  Statistical significance level and power

3.  Express the target difference according to outcome type

    a.  Binary---state the target difference as an absolute or relative
        effect (or both), along with the intervention and control group
        proportions. If both an absolute and a relative difference are
        provided, clarify if either takes primacy in terms of the sample
        size calculation

    b.  Continuous---state the target mean difference on the natural
        scale, common standard deviation, and standardised effect size
        (mean difference divided by the standard deviation)

    c.  Time to event---state the target difference as an absolute or
        relative difference (or both); provide the control group event
        proportion, planned length of follow-up, intervention and
        control group survival distributions, and accrual time (if
        assumptions regarding these values are made). If both an
        absolute and relative difference are provided for a particular
        time point, clarify if either takes primacy in terms of the
        sample size calculation

4.  Allocation ratio. If an unequal ratio is used, the reason for this
    should be stated

5.  Sample size based on the assumptions as per above

    a.  Reference the formula/sample size calculation approach, if
        standard binary, continuous, or survival outcome formulas are
        not used. For a time-to-event outcome, the number of events
        required should be stated

    b.  If any adjustments (eg, allowance for loss to follow-up,
        multiple testing) that alter the required sample size are
        incorporated, they should also be specified, referenced, and
        justified along with the final sample size

    c.  For alternative designs, additional input should be stated and
        justified

    d.  Provide details of any assessment of the sensitivity of the
        sample size to the inputs used

#### Additional items for grant application and trial protocol

1.  Underlying basis used for specifying the target difference (an
    important or realistic difference)

2.  Explain the choice of target difference---specify and reference any
    formal method used or relevant previous research

#### Additional item for trial results paper

1.  Reference the trial protocol.

Transparency in the sample size reveals the power of the trial to
readers and gives them a measure by which to assess whether the trial
attained its planned size. Any differences in the planned sample size
described in the trial registration (item 2), study protocol (item 3),
or statistical analysis plan should be explained.

Interim analyses are used in some trials to help decide whether to stop
early or to continue recruiting sometimes beyond the planned trial end
(item 16b). If the actual sample size differed from the originally
intended sample size for some other reason (eg, because of poor
recruitment or revision of the target sample size), an explanation
should be given alongside details of the revised sample size. Many
reviews have found that few authors report how they determined the
sample size.[@ref222; @ref246; @ref247; @ref248; @ref249; @ref250]
[@ref251; @ref252]

There is no value in conducting and reporting a post hoc calculation of
statistical power using the results of a trial, for example, as a
pretext to explain non-significant findings; this may even mislead and
confuse readers.[@ref253; @ref254]

:::
