---
id: randomisation-sequence-generation
title: 17a. Sequence Generation
summary:
    text: Who generated the random allocation sequence and the method used.
---

## What to write

Who generated the random allocation sequence and the method used

## Examples

"Randomization was done using computer-generated random numbers (Stat
Trek software) by trained staff at the Soltan Mirahmad Clinic (Kashan,
Iran)."[@ref261]

"The randomization was conducted by two independent researchers who were
not involved in the study using a computer random sequence
generator."[@ref262]

## Explanation

Randomisation eliminates selection bias at trial entry and is the
crucial component of high quality randomised trials ([box
5](#box5){ref-type="boxed-text"}).[@ref271] Successful randomisation
hinges on two steps: generation of an unpredictable allocation sequence
and concealment of this sequence from the investigators enrolling
participants (item 18).[@ref268; @ref269]

### Treatment allocation in trials

The method used to assign interventions to trial participants is a
crucial aspect of clinical trial design. Random assignment is the
preferred method; it has been successfully used regularly in trials for
more than 75 years.[@ref263] Randomisation has three major
advantages.[@ref264] Firstly, when properly implemented, it eliminates
selection bias, balancing both known and unknown prognostic factors, in
the assignment of treatments. Without randomisation, treatment
comparisons may be prejudiced, whether consciously or not, by selection
of participants of a particular kind to receive a particular treatment.
Secondly, random assignment permits the use of probability theory to
express the likelihood that any difference in outcome between
intervention groups reflects mere chance.[@ref265] Thirdly, random
allocation, in some situations, facilitates blinding the identity of
treatments to the investigators, participants, and evaluators, possibly
by use of a placebo, which reduces bias after assignment of
treatments.[@ref266] Of these three advantages, reducing selection bias
at trial entry is usually the most important.[@ref267]

Successful randomisation in practice depends on two inter-related
aspects: adequate generation of an unpredictable allocation sequence and
concealment of that sequence until assignment occurs.[@ref268; @ref269]
A key issue is whether the sequence is known or predictable by the
people involved in allocating participants to the comparison
groups.[@ref270] The treatment allocation system should thus be set up
so that the person enrolling participants does not know in advance which
treatment the next person will get, a process termed allocation
concealment.[@ref268; @ref269] Proper allocation concealment shields
knowledge of forthcoming assignments, whereas proper random sequences
prevent correct anticipation of future assignments based on knowledge of
past assignments.

Who generated the random allocation sequence is important mainly for two
reasons. Firstly, someone, or some group, should take responsibility for
this critical trial function. Secondly, providing information on the
generator might help readers to evaluate whether anyone had access to
the allocation sequence during implementation. Investigators should
strive for complete separation, independence, between the trial staff
involved with generation of the allocation sequence and those staff who
implement assignments (see explanation for item 19).

Participants should be assigned to comparison groups in the trial on the
basis of a chance (random) process characterised by unpredictability
([box 5](#box5){ref-type="boxed-text"}). Successful randomisation in
practice depends on two inter-related aspects: adequate generation of an
unpredictable allocation sequence and concealment of that sequence until
assignment occurs. A key issue is whether the sequence is known or
predictable by the people involved in allocating participants to the
comparison groups. The treatment allocation system should thus be set up
so that the person enrolling participants does not know in advance which
treatment the next person will receive, a process termed allocation
concealment (item 18). Proper allocation concealment shields knowledge
of forthcoming assignments, whereas proper random sequences (item 17)
prevent correct anticipation of future assignments based on knowledge of
past assignments ([box 5](#box5){ref-type="boxed-text"}).

Authors should provide sufficient information such that the reader can
assess the methods used to generate the random allocation sequence and
the likelihood of bias in group assignment. Any software used for random
sequence generation should also be reported. It is important that
information on the process of randomisation is included in the body of
the main article and not as a separate supplementary file, where it can
be missed by the reader.

The term "random" has a precise technical meaning. With random
allocation, each participant has a known probability of receiving each
intervention before one is assigned, and the assigned intervention is
determined by a chance process and cannot be predicted. However,
"random" is sometimes used inappropriately in the literature to describe
trials in which non-random, "deterministic" allocation methods were
used, such as alternation, hospital numbers, or date of birth. When
investigators use such non-random methods, they should describe them
precisely and should not use the term "random" or any variation of it.
Even the term "quasi-random" is unacceptable for describing such trials.
Trials based on non-random methods generally yield biased results[@ref4]
[@ref268; @ref272; @ref273; @ref274; @ref275; @ref276; @ref277];
bias presumably arises from the inability to adequately conceal these
more predictable, non-random sequence generation systems.

Many methods of sequence generation are adequate. However, readers
cannot judge adequacy from such terms as "random allocation,"
"randomisation," or "random" without further elaboration. Authors should
specify the method of sequence generation, such as a random-number table
or a computerised random number generator. The sequence may be generated
by the process of minimisation, a non-random but generally acceptable
method.

In some trials, participants are intentionally allocated in unequal
numbers to each intervention: for example, to gain more experience with
a new procedure or to limit costs of the trial. In such cases, authors
should report the randomisation ratio (eg, 2:1, or two treatment
participants per control participant; item 9).

In a representative sample of PubMed indexed trials in 2000, only 21%
reported an adequate approach to random sequence generation [@ref220];
this increased to 34% for a similar cohort of PubMed indexed trials in
2006.[@ref221] Two more recent studies showed further small increases to
about 40%,[@ref278; @ref279] but another reported a stubbornly similar
level of 32%.[@ref277] When authors report an adequate approach to
random sequence generation, in over 90% of cases they report using a
random number generator on a computer or a random number table.[@ref221]
[@ref279]