---
id: randomisation-type-of-randomisation
title: 17b. Type of Randomisation
summary:
    text: Type of randomisation and details of any restriction (eg, stratification, blocking, and block size).
---

## What to write

Type of randomisation and details of any restriction (eg, stratification, blocking, and block size)

## Examples

"Treatment assignment was generated using a simple randomization scheme
. . . given the open-label nature of the intervention to limit the
potential bias due to predictable treatment assignment."[@ref280]

"Randomization (1:1) was performed by an independent researcher using
computer generated random table numbers, with a block size of 20 and
stratified for the indication of the IUI \[intrauterine insemination\]
(mild male factor or unexplained subfertility)."[@ref281]

"Participants were randomized at an individual-level (1:1 ratio) and
were stratified by recruitment location (VU \[Vrije University\] and UvA
\[University of Amsterdam\]). Block randomization was applied with
randomly varied block sizes (6--12 allocations per block)."[@ref262]

"Randomization was stratified by treatment centre, clinical severity
(\<4 vs \>4 on a Western Ontario and McMaster Universities
Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) pain subscale standardized to range from 0
to 10), and by whether patients had previously received TENS
\[transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation\] with randomly varied
block sizes of 2, 4, and 6."[@ref282]

"Randomization sequence was created using Stata 9.0 (StataCorp., College
Station, TX) statistical software and was stratified by center with a
1:1 allocation using random block sizes of 2,4, and 6."[@ref283]

## Explanation

In trials of several hundred participants or more, simple randomisation
can usually be trusted to generate similar numbers in the two trial
groups [@ref284] and to generate groups that are roughly comparable in
terms of known and unknown prognostic variables.[@ref285] For smaller
trials of fewer than around 200 participants,[@ref286] which are common,
some form of restricted randomisation procedure to help achieve balance
between groups in size or characteristics may be useful ([box
6](#box6){ref-type="boxed-text"}). However, larger trials of greater
than approximately 200 participants may also benefit from registration.
For example, they may stop before reaching their target size, they may
need more power at interim analyses, or they may benefit from
stratification with restriction.

### Randomisation and minimisation

#### Simple randomisation

Pure randomisation based on a single allocation ratio is known as simple
randomisation. Simple randomisation with a 1:1 allocation ratio is
analogous to a coin toss, although we do not advocate coin tossing for
randomisation in a randomised trial. The term "simple" is somewhat of a
misnomer. While other randomisation schemes sound complex and more
sophisticated, in reality, simple randomisation is elegantly
sophisticated in that it is more unpredictable and could surpass the
bias prevention levels of all other alternatives.

#### Restricted randomisation

Restricted randomisation specifies any randomised approach that is not
simple randomisation. Blocked randomisation is the most common form.
Other means of restricted randomisation include replacement, biased
coin, and urn randomisation, although these are used much less
frequently.[@ref286]

#### Blocked randomisation

Blocking can be used to ensure close balance of the numbers in each
group at any time during the trial. After a block of every eight
participants was assigned, for example, four would be allocated to each
arm of the trial.[@ref287] Improved balance comes at the cost of
reducing the unpredictability of the sequence. Although the order of
interventions varies randomly within each block, a person running the
trial could deduce some of the next treatment allocations if they
discovered the block size.[@ref288] Blinding the interventions, using
larger block sizes, and randomly varying the block size can ameliorate
this problem.

#### Stratified randomisation

Stratification is used to ensure a good balance of participant
characteristics in each group. By chance, particularly in small trials,
trial groups may not be well matched for baseline characteristics, such
as age and stage of disease. This weakens the trial's
credibility.[@ref289] Such imbalances can be avoided without sacrificing
the advantages of randomisation. Stratification ensures that the numbers
of participants receiving each intervention are closely balanced within
each stratum. Stratified randomisation is achieved by performing a
separate randomisation procedure within each of two or more subsets of
participants (eg, those defining each centre, age, or disease severity).
Stratification by centre is common in multicentre trials. Stratification
requires some form of restriction, such as blocking within strata.
Stratification without some form of restriction is ineffective.

#### Minimisation

Minimisation improves balance between intervention groups for several
selected patient factors (eg, age).[@ref271; @ref290] The first patient
is truly randomly allocated; for each subsequent participant, the
treatment allocation that minimises the imbalance on the selected
factors between groups at that time is identified. That allocation may
then be used, or a choice may be made at random with a heavy weighting
in favour of the intervention that would minimise imbalance (eg, with a
probability of 0.8). The use of a random component is generally
preferable. Minimisation has the advantage of creating small groups
closely similar in terms of measurable participant characteristics at
all stages of the trial.

Minimisation offers the only acceptable alternative to randomisation,
and some have argued that it is superior.[@ref291] Conversely,
minimisation lacks the theoretical basis for eliminating bias on all
known and unknown factors. Nevertheless, in general, trials that use
minimisation are considered methodologically equivalent to randomised
trials, even when a random element is not incorporated.

It is important to indicate whether no restriction was used by stating
such or by stating that simple randomisation was done. Otherwise, the
methods used to restrict the randomisation, along with the method used
for random selection, should be specified. For blocked randomisation,
authors should provide details on how the blocks were generated (eg, by
using a permuted block design with a computer random number generator),
the block size or sizes, and whether the block size was fixed or
randomly varied. If the trialists became aware of the block size(s),
that information should also be reported as such knowledge could lead to
them correctly deciphering future treatment assignments. Authors should
specify whether stratification was used and, if so, which factors (eg,
recruitment site, sex, disease stage) were involved; the categorisation
cut-off thresholds within stratums; and the method used for restriction.
Although stratification is a useful technique, especially for smaller
trials, it can be complicated to implement and may not perform as well
as expected if many stratifying factors are used. If minimisation ([box
6](#box6){ref-type="boxed-text"}) was used, it should be explicitly
identified, as should the variables incorporated into the scheme;
whether a random element was used should also be stated.

With blocking, although the order of interventions varies randomly
within each block, individuals running the trial could deduce some of
the future treatment allocations if they discovered the block
size.[@ref288] Discovering block sizes is much more likely in unblinded
trials, where treatment allocations become known after assignment ([box
6](#box6){ref-type="boxed-text"}). Certain techniques, such as large
block sizes and randomly varying block sizes, can help prevent the
deciphering of future treatment allocations. Unfortunately, particularly
with unblinded trials, a review "found that very few trials used
techniques that would eliminate the risk of selection bias," and that
"These findings indicate that a substantial proportion of unblinded
trials are at risk of selection bias."[@ref292] Indeed, in a recent
study of 179 open, unblinded randomised trials, small block sizes were
associated with subversion.[@ref293]

Only 9% of 206 reports of trials in specialty journals[@ref269] and 39%
of 80 trials in general medical journals reported use of
stratification.[@ref294] In each case, only about half of the reports
mentioned the use of restricted randomisation. Those studies and that of
Adetugbo and Williams[@ref295] found that the sizes of the treatment
groups in many trials were very often the same or quite similar, yet
blocking or stratification had not been mentioned. One of a few possible
causes of this close balance in numbers is under-reporting of the use of
restricted randomisation, although non-random manipulation of treatment
assignments is also suspected. A more recent study of 298 reports of
trials in general medical journals found 69% reported the use of a
stratified block method.[@ref296]