---
id: allocation-concealment-mechanism
title: 18. Allocation concealment mechanism
summary:
    text: Mechanism used to implement the random allocation sequence (eg, central computer/telephone; sequentially numbered, opaque, sealed containers), describing any steps to conceal the sequence until interventions were assigned.
---

## What to write

Mechanism used to implement the random allocation sequence (eg, central computer/telephone; sequentially numbered, opaque, sealed containers), describing any steps to conceal the sequence until interventions were assigned.

## Examples

"Participants were centrally assigned to randomised study treatment
using an interactive web response system (IWRS) . . . Block
randomisation schedules were computer generated by a vendor with a block
size of 6 in a randomisation ratio of 2:1 and distributed to the IWRS
vendor (endpointClinical) for participant randomisation."[@ref297]

"For allocation concealment, numbered containers were used. The
interventions were sealed in sequentially numbered identical opaque
containers according to the allocation sequence."[@ref298]

"Furthermore, we employed syringes sequentially numbered and packaged in
opaque and sealed containers. Specifically, syringes containing esmolol
or placebo were centrally prepared, pre-coded based on the randomization
list, and sent sequentially to the operating room immediately before
administration."[@ref299]

"Allocation was concealed using sequentially numbered, opaque, sealed
envelopes (SNOSE) prior to making the incision."[@ref300]

"Allocation concealment was done using sequentially numbered, sealed,
opaque packages."[@ref261]

"The allocation sequence was concealed from the researcher (JR)
enrolling and assessing participants in sequentially numbered, opaque,
sealed and stapled envelopes. Aluminium foil inside the envelope was
used to render the envelope impermeable to intense light. To prevent
subversion of the allocation sequence, the name and date of birth of the
participant was written on the envelope and a video tape made of the
sealed envelope with participant details visible. Carbon paper inside
the envelope transferred the information onto the allocation card inside
the envelope and a second researcher (CC) later viewed video tapes to
ensure envelopes were still sealed when participants\' names were
written on them. Corresponding envelopes were opened only after the
enrolled participants completed all baseline assessments and it was time
to allocate the intervention."[@ref301]

## Explanation

Item 17 discussed generation of an unpredictable sequence of
assignments. Of considerable importance is how this sequence is applied
when participants are enrolled into the trial. A generated allocation sequence
should be implemented by using allocation concealment,[@ref269] a
critical mechanism that prevents foreknowledge of treatment assignment
and thus shields those who enrol participants from being influenced by
this knowledge. The decision to accept or reject a participant should be
made, and informed consent should be obtained from the participant, in
ignorance of the next assignment in the sequence.[@ref302] In summary,
adequate allocation concealment safeguards knowledge of forthcoming
assignments, whereas proper random sequences (item 17) prevent correct
anticipation of future assignments based on knowledge of past
assignments.

Allocation concealment should not be confused with blinding (item 20).
Allocation concealment seeks to prevent selection bias, protects the assignment sequence
before and until allocation, and can always be successfully
implemented.[@ref268] In contrast, blinding seeks to prevent
ascertainment bias, protects the sequence after allocation, and cannot
always be implemented.[@ref269] Without adequate allocation concealment,
however, even random, unpredictable assignment sequences can be
subverted.[@ref268; @ref303]

Centralised or third party assignment is especially desirable. Many good
allocation concealment mechanisms incorporate external involvement. Use
of a pharmacy or central computer or telephone randomisation system are
common techniques. Automated assignment systems are likely to become
more common.[@ref221] When external involvement is not feasible, an
excellent method of allocation concealment is the use of numbered
containers. The interventions (often medicines) are sealed in
sequentially numbered identical containers according to the allocation
sequence.[@ref304] Enclosing assignments in sequentially numbered,
opaque, sealed envelopes can be a good allocation concealment mechanism
if it is developed and monitored diligently.[@ref288; @ref305] This
method can be corrupted, however, particularly if it is poorly executed.
Investigators should ensure that the envelopes are opaque when held to
the light, and are opened sequentially and only after the participant's
name and other details are written on the appropriate sequentially
numbered sealed envelope.[@ref288; @ref305; @ref306]

A number of methodological studies provide empirical evidence to support
these precautions.[@ref4; @ref268; @ref275; @ref276; @ref277]
[@ref307; @ref308; @ref309] Trials in which the allocation sequence
had been inadequately or unclearly concealed yielded larger estimates of
treatment effects than did trials in which authors reported adequate
allocation concealment. These findings provide strong empirical evidence
that inadequate allocation concealment contributes to bias in estimating
treatment effects.

Despite the importance of the mechanism of allocation concealment,
published reports frequently omit such details. Among older studies, the
mechanism used to allocate interventions was omitted in reports of 89%
of trials on rheumatoid arthritis,[@ref310] 48% of trials in obstetrics
and gynaecology journals,[@ref269] and 44% of trials in general medical
journals.[@ref294] In a more broadly representative sample of all PubMed
indexed randomised trials, only 18% reported any allocation concealment
mechanism and some of those reported mechanisms were
inadequate.[@ref220] At the same time, some trials where there is no
reporting of allocation concealment may have been properly concealed, as
demonstrated by inspection of their protocols.[@ref311]

Newer studies further illuminate poor reporting of allocation
concealment. Unclear reporting (ie, the authors did not provide
sufficient information in the paper to allow judgment to be made on the
adequacy of method of allocation concealment) was found in 78%[@ref312]
and 85%[@ref277] of trials. Moreover, those two studies determined that
only 27%[@ref312] and 14%[@ref277] used an adequate allocation
concealment mechanism, while another found a similar level of
12%.[@ref278] A review of trials in journals of traditional Chinese
medicine found that only 7% used adequate allocation
concealment.[@ref313]

Fortunately, reporting and conduct may be improving in recent years, for
example, after the CONSORT 2010 guidelines were published.[@ref314]
Another study found that reporting on allocation concealment and
sequence generation was much better in journals that endorsed the
CONSORT 2010 guidelines than in non-endorsing journals.[@ref305]
Moreover, that study found that 57% of trials in the sample had used an
adequate allocation concealment mechanism.[@ref305] However, other
empirical studies show only modest improvements, for example, an
evaluation of over 176 000 trials[@ref315] found that allocation
concealment reporting increased from 5.1% in 1966-90 to 19.3% in
2010-18. While any improvement is encouraging, more efforts to improve
conduct and reporting remain necessary.

<!-- #TODO "into the trial" and "prevent selection bias" both link to "box 5" check the article to see what box 5 is -->