---
id: implementation
title: 19. Implementation
summary:
    text: Whether the personnel who enrolled and those who assigned participants to the interventions had access to the random allocation sequence.
---

## What to write

Whether the personnel who enrolled and those who assigned participants to the interventions had access to the random allocation sequence

## Examples

"Sequential randomisation codes were computer generated using permuted
blocks . . . An independent study statistician generated the
randomisation codes . . . Good Clinical Practice (GCP) trained research
nurses or First Nations health practitioners allocate the study medicine
to each mother--infant pair by selecting the next sequentially labelled
(prerandomised) study medication from the appropriate stratification
group. The allocation ﻿sequence number is recorded by the research team
on the data collection form (DCF), the database and in the participant's
medical record."[@ref316]

"LabCorp Drug Development (a subcontractor to the IWRS \[interactive web
response system\] vendor) generated the live randomisation schedules.
Site personnel enrolled participants in the IWRS. The IWRS assigned
participants to the trial groups per live randomisation schedules.
LabCorp Drug Development didn't have any involvement in the rest of the
trial . . . Site personnel were involved in participant care and
performing trial procedures throughout the trial; however, they were
masked to treatment assignment."[@ref297]

"All participants were screened by a masked trial doctor who also
obtained informed consent . . . The masked trial doctor then provided
all participants with guideline-recommended care and a prescription for
the trial medicine kit . . . The randomisation sequence was created
using randomly permuted blocks by an independent statistician (who had
no involvement in the rest of the trial)."[@ref317]

"The details of sequence generation and group allocation were
unavailable to research team members bar one unblinded research
assistant. The unblinded research team member that created the
randomisation sequence had no contact with participants and was not
involved with data collection or analysis."[@ref318]

"Block randomisation was by a computer generated random number list
prepared by an investigator with no clinical involvement in the trial .
. . After the research nurse had obtained the patient's consent, she
telephoned a contact who was independent of the recruitment process for
allocation consignment."[@ref319]

## Explanation

As noted in item 18, concealment of the allocated intervention at the
time of enrolment is especially important. Thus, in addition to knowing
the methods used, it is also important to understand how the random
sequence was implemented; specifically, whether the personnel who
enrolled and those who assigned participants to the interventions had
access to the random allocation sequence.

In practice, the process of randomising participants into a trial has
three different steps: sequence generation, allocation concealment
mechanism, and implementation (see @tbl-6).
Although the same individuals may carry out more than one process under
each heading, investigators should strive for complete separation of the
people involved with generation and allocation concealment from the
people who implement assignments. Thus, if someone is involved in the
sequence generation or allocation concealment steps, ideally, they
should not be involved in the implementation step. When this separation
is not possible, importantly the investigators should ensure that the
assignment schedule is unpredictable and locked away from even the
person who generated it.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Sequence generation                                   Allocation concealment                                                                                                          Implementation
  ----------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Generate allocation sequence by a random procedure\   Develop allocation concealment mechanism (eg, numbered, identical bottles or sequentially numbered, sealed, opaque envelopes)   Enrol participants:\
  \                                                                                                                                                                                     • assess eligibility\
                                                                                                                                                                                        • discuss the trial\
                                                                                                                                                                                        • obtain informed consent\
                                                                                                                                                                                        • enrol participant in trial

                                                        Prepare the allocation concealment mechanism using the allocation sequence from the sequence generation step\                   Ascertain intervention assignment\
                                                                                                                                                                                        (eg, opening next envelope) and assign participant to appropriate intervention

                                                                                                                                                                                        Administer intervention
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

: Steps in a typical randomisation process {#tbl-6}

Even with flawless sequence generation and allocation concealment,
failure to separate creation and concealment of the allocation sequence
from assignment to trial group may introduce bias. For example, the
person who was enrolling and assigning participants and who also
generated an allocation sequence would likely have access to the
sequence list and could consult it when interviewing potential
participants for a trial. Thus, that person could bias the enrolment or
assignment process, regardless of the unpredictability of the assignment
sequence and the impenetrability of the allocation concealment
mechanism. Investigators must therefore ensure that the assignment
schedule is unpredictable and locked away (eg, in a safe deposit box in
a building inaccessible to the enrolment location) from even the person
who generated it. In that instance, the report of the trial should
specify where the investigators stored the allocation list.

Thus, for full assessment of randomisation in a trial report, authors
should confirm that personnel who enrolled and those who assigned
participants to the interventions did not have access to the random
allocation sequence. At minimum, authors should confirm complete
separation of the people involved with generation and allocation
concealment from the people involved in the implementation of
assignments. If complete separation did not occur, then authors should
describe how the people involved in the implementation were prevented
from accessing the sequence (eg, specifying that the allocation sequence
was locked in a secure location).

Sometimes those who enrol and those who assign are different people, but
frequently the same individuals do both. These individuals may be termed
differently by authors (eg, recruiters), but the functions remain the
same.

Full assessment of implementation is not always possible from trial
reports. In a sample of 199 medical journals, 63% of trial reports did
not provide sufficient information to assess whether the person who
generated the allocation sequence was not also the person who allocated
participants to treatment groups.[@ref306] Only 31% of trial reports
provided sufficient details ﻿on who recruited participants and who
generated the allocation sequence.[@ref306]
