---
id: blinding-who
title: 20a. Who was blinded
summary:
    text: Who was blinded after assignment to interventions (eg, participants, care providers, outcome assessors, data analysts).
---

## What to write

Who was blinded after assignment to interventions (eg, participants, care providers, outcome assessors, data analysts)

## Examples

"Whereas patients and physicians allocated to the intervention group
were aware of the allocated arm, outcome assessors and data analysts
were kept blinded to the allocation."[@ref320]

"Blinding and equipoise were strictly maintained by emphasizing to
intervention staff and participants that each diet adheres to healthy
principles, and each is advocated by certain experts to be superior for
long-term weight-loss. Except for the interventionists (dieticians and
behavioural psychologists), investigators and staff were kept blind to
diet assignment of the participants. The trial adhered to established
procedures to maintain separation between staff that take outcome
measurements and staff that deliver the intervention. Staff members who
obtained outcome measurements were not informed of the diet group
assignment. Intervention staff, dieticians and behavioural psychologists
who delivered the intervention did not take outcome measurements. All
investigators, staff, and participants were kept masked to outcome
measurements and trial results."[@ref321]

"This was a double-blind study with limited access to the randomisation
code . . . The treatment each patient received was not disclosed to the
investigator, study site staff, patient, sponsor personnel involved with
the conduct of the study (with the exception of the clinical supply
staff and designated safety staff), or study vendors."[@ref297]

"Physicians, patients, nurses responsible for referring the patients,
the statistician, also the investigators who rated the patients and
administered the drugs, were all blinded to the allocation."[@ref261]

## Explanation

The term "blinding" (masking) refers to withholding information about
the assigned interventions from people involved in the trial who may
potentially be influenced by this knowledge. Blinding is an important
safeguard against bias, particularly when assessing subjective
outcomes.[@ref308]

Benjamin Franklin has been credited as being the first to use blinding
in a scientific experiment.[@ref322] He blindfolded participants so they
would not know when he was applying mesmerism (a popular healing
technique of the 18th century) and in so doing demonstrated that
mesmerism was a sham. Since then, the scientific community has widely
recognised the power of blinding to reduce bias, and it has remained a
commonly used strategy in scientific experiments.

The section on blinding terminology below defines
the groups of individuals (ie, participants, healthcare providers, data
collectors, outcome assessors, and data analysts) that can potentially
introduce bias into a trial through knowledge of the treatment
assignments. Participants may respond differently if they are aware of
their treatment assignment (eg, respond more favourably when they
receive the new treatment).[@ref308] Lack of blinding may also influence
adherence with the intervention, use of co-interventions, and risk of
dropping out of the trial.

### Blinding terminology

For a technical term to be useful, its use and interpretation must be
consistent. Authors of trials commonly use the term "double blind," and
less commonly the terms "single blind" or "triple blind." A problem with
this lexicon is that there is great variability in clinician
interpretations and epidemiological textbook definitions of these
terms.[@ref323] Moreover, a study of 200 randomised trials reported as
double blind demonstrated 18 different combinations of groups actually
blinded when the authors of these trials were surveyed, and
approximately one in every five of these trials---reported as double
blind---did not blind participants, healthcare providers, or data
collectors.[@ref324]

This research demonstrates that terms are ambiguous and, as such,
authors and editors should abandon their usage in isolation without
defining them. Authors should instead explicitly report the blinding
status of the people involved for whom blinding may influence the
validity of a trial.

The healthcare providers include all personnel (eg, physicians,
chiropractors, physiotherapists, nurses) who care for the participants
during the trial. Data collectors are the individuals who collect data
on the trial outcomes. Outcome assessors are the individuals who
determine whether a participant did experience the outcomes of interest.

Some researchers have also advocated blinding and reporting the blinding
status of the data monitoring committee and the manuscript
writers.[@ref325] Blinding of these groups is uncommon and the value of
blinding them is debated.[@ref326]

Sometimes one group of individuals (eg, the healthcare providers) is
also the same individuals fulfilling another role in a trial (eg, the
data collectors). Even if this is the case, the authors should state the
blinding status of these groups to allow readers to judge the validity
of the trial.

Unblinded healthcare providers may introduce similar biases; and
unblinded data collectors may differentially assess outcomes (eg,
frequency or timing), repeat measurements of abnormal findings, or
provide encouragement during performance testing. Unblinded outcome
assessors may differentially assess subjective outcomes, and unblinded
data analysts may introduce bias through the choice of analytical
strategies, such as the selection of favourable time points or outcomes
and by decisions to remove patients from the analyses. These biases have
been well documented.[@ref32; @ref308; @ref325; @ref327; @ref328]
[@ref329]

Blinding, unlike allocation concealment (item 18), may not always be
appropriate or possible. In pragmatic trials (trials that try to make
the experience as close as real life so as to understand real world
effectiveness), blinding of participants and healthcare providers would
decrease the pragmatism of the trials, since patients in real life are
not blinded.[@ref330] An example where blinding is impossible is a trial
comparing levels of pain associated with sampling blood from the ear or
thumb.[@ref331] However, in randomised trials for which blinding is
possible, lack of blinding has usually been associated with empirical
evidence of exaggeration in treatment effect estimates.[@ref276]
[@ref308; @ref332; @ref333; @ref334; @ref335; @ref336] Blinding is
particularly important when outcome measures involve some subjectivity,
such as assessment of pain. Yet, blinding may not be as important in
certain fields or with certain outcomes. For example, blinding of data
collectors and outcome assessors is unlikely to matter for objective
outcomes, such as death from any cause. Indeed, some methodological
investigations have not found that lack of blinding is associated with
empirical evidence of bias in treatment effect estimates.[@ref337]
[@ref338; @ref339; @ref340; @ref341; @ref342; @ref343] Even then,
however, lack of participant or healthcare provider blinding can lead to
other problems, such as differential attrition.[@ref344] In certain
trials, especially surgical trials, blinding of participants and
healthcare providers is often difficult or impossible, but blinding of
data collectors and outcome assessors for both benefits and harms is
often achievable and recommended. For example, lesions can be
photographed before and after treatment and assessed by an external
observer.[@ref345] Regardless of whether blinding is possible, authors
can and should always state who was blinded (ie, participants,
healthcare providers, data collectors, data analysts, and/or outcome
assessors).[@ref346; @ref347]

However, authors frequently do not report whether blinding was
used.[@ref348; @ref349] For example, reports of 51% of 506 trials in
cystic fibrosis,[@ref350] 33% of 196 trials in rheumatoid
arthritis,[@ref310] and 38% of 68 trials in dermatology[@ref295] did not
state whether blinding was used. Similarly, a more recent review found
that the reports of 38% of 622 trials in ï»¿high impact anaesthesiology
journals did not explicitly describe the trial as blinded or
non-blinded.[@ref351] Moreover, when describing some form of blinding,
the most used term was the ambiguous "double blind."[@ref351] Authors
should explicitly state who was blinded, but only 14% of 622 trials
explicitly reported whether the three key groups of individuals---that
is, the participants, healthcare providers, and data collectors---were
blinded or not.[@ref351] The rate did improve from 10% to 26% over the
years of that review, but more improvement is needed. Until authors of
trials improve their reporting of blinding, readers will have difficulty
in judging its adequacy.

The term "masking" is sometimes used in preference to "blinding" to
avoid confusion with the medical condition of being without sight.
However, "blinding" in its methodological sense appears to be more
universally understood worldwide and to be generally preferred for
reporting clinical trials.[@ref344; @ref345; @ref352]