---
id: blinding-how
title: 20b. How blinding was achieved
summary:
    text: If blinded, how blinding was achieved and description of the similarity of interventions.
---

## What to write

If blinded, how blinding was achieved and description of the similarity of interventions

## Examples

"Jamieson Laboratories Inc. provided 500-mg immediate release niacin in
a white, oblong, bisect caplet. We independently confirmed caplet
content using high performance liquid chromatography . . . The placebo
was matched to the study drug for taste, color, and size, and contained
microcrystalline cellulose, silicon dioxide, dicalcium phosphate,
magnesium stearate, and stearic acid."[@ref353]

"Placebo tablets were identical to NAC \[N‚Äêacetylcysteine\] tablets in
color, shape, size, and odor. They were all kept in identical containers
and were administered by an investigational drug pharmacist."[@ref261]

"The study treatment and placebo tablets and bottles were identical in
physical appearance . . . The IWRS \[interactive web response system\]
housed treatment codes and bottle numbers for study treatment. In case
of an emergency, the investigator had the sole responsibility for
determining if unmasking of a participant's treatment assignment was
warranted to provide appropriate medical care. Participant safety was
always the first consideration in making such a determination. The IWRS
was programmed with blind-breaking instructions to guide the
investigator on how to obtain treatment assignment in the event of an
emergency unmasking. The investigator was requested to contact the
medical monitor promptly in case of any treatment unmasking. If a
participant's treatment assignment was unmasked, the sponsor was to be
notified within 24 h after unmasking. The date and reason for the
unmasking were recorded in the source documentation and electronic case
report form, as applicable. Investigators broke the masking for four
participants: one in ELEVATE UC 12 (on etrasimod) and three in ELEVATE
UC 52 (on etrasimod)."[@ref297]

## Explanation

Blinding of participants, healthcare providers, data collectors, and
outcome assessors in a trial requires adequate procedures to both
achieve and maintain blinding.[@ref346; @ref347] Just as we seek
evidence of adequate allocation concealment to assure us that assignment
was truly random, we seek evidence on the method of blinding.

If researchers contend that the trial investigators, participants, and
assessors were blinded, then they should provide information about the
mechanism used to establish blinding (eg, placebo identical to the
experimental intervention, sham intervention, sham surgery).[@ref346]
[@ref347] They should describe the similarity of treatment
characteristics (eg, route of administration, appearance, smell, taste)
and where relevant methods used to mask some characteristics of the
treatments (eg, use of special flavours to mask a distinctive taste,
opaque coverage to conceal intravenous treatments with different
appearances, double-dummy procedures).[@ref346; @ref347]

Blinding can be difficult to maintain over time because of dosage
adaptation over time or the occurrence of specific side effects.
Specific procedures to maintain blinding can be implemented (eg,
centralised assessment of side effects, centralised adapted dosage, or
provision of sham results of complementary investigations).

Even if blinding of participants and healthcare providers is not
possible, blinding data collectors and outcome assessors could still be
implemented to limit ascertainment bias. This could be achieved, for
example, through centralised assessment of complementary investigation
(eg, anonymised radiography), physician mediated data (eg, video,
photography, audiotape), and clinical events (eg, adjudication of
clinical events from extract of the case report form).

Details of how blinding was achieved are important because slight, but
discernible, differences between interventions can lead to large
problems in bias. Notably, inadequate matching related to discernible
differences in colour and taste seem particularly problematic.[@ref354]
It is important that authors report any known compromises in blinding.
For example, authors should report if it was necessary to unblind any
participants at any point during the conduct of the trial. Moreover,
authors should report the risk of unblinding but, unfortunately, such
reporting is rare. In a random sample of 300 publications describing
blinded randomised clinical trials indexed in PubMed, only 8% reported
on risk of unblinding.[@ref355] It is also important to report any
procedures, pretrial or concurrent, that are intended to reduce or
evaluate risk of compromised blinding.[@ref354; @ref355; @ref356]
Indeed, some pretrial assessments of unblinding may be helpful in
reducing the risk of unblinding in the eventual randomised trial. Thus,
authors of randomised trial articles should report procedures to avoid,
document, and address cases of overt unblinding.[@ref354; @ref355]

Where appropriate, authors should also describe any procedures used for
emergency unblinding (ie, disclosing the assigned intervention of a
trial participant for specific reasons such as harms). They should
indicate whether they used fixed code to indicate group assignment (eg,
A=group 1; B=group 2) or a unique code for each participant. Use of a
fixed code will increase the risk of unblinding because unblinding a
participant could result in unblinding several or all trial
participants.[@ref6; @ref286; @ref357]

Some people have advocated testing for blinding by asking participants
or healthcare providers at the end of a trial whether they think the
participant received the experimental or control intervention.[@ref358]
Because participants and healthcare providers will frequently know
whether the participant has experienced the primary outcome, this makes
it difficult to determine whether their responses reflect failure of
blinding or accurate assumptions about the efficacy of the
intervention.[@ref359] Thus, given the uncertainty this type of
information provides, the usefulness of tests of blinding has been
questioned.[@ref354; @ref355; @ref360] Testing for blinding was not an
included item in CONSORT 2010, and still is not in CONSORT 2025.
Nevertheless, if investigators decide to conduct tests of blinding, we
encourage them to completely report their findings with appropriate
limitations.[@ref356]
