---
id: statistical-methods-definition-of-who-is-included-in-each-analysis
title: 21b. Definition of who is included in each analysis
summary:
    text: Definition of who is included in each analysis (e.g., all randomised participants), and in which group.
---

## What to write

Definition of who is included in each analysis (eg, all randomised participants), and in which group

## Examples

"The primary statistical analyses were performed according to the
treatment to which the participants were randomly assigned. The analyses
of the efficacy and safety outcomes (other than adverse events) included
all available data from all randomized participants who contributed at
least 1 value after baseline for the outcome of interest. The data that
were obtained after a participant enrolled in another trial of an
investigational treatment were excluded from the analyses. However, the
participant was included in the analyses if that participant contributed
at least 1 value after baseline for the outcome of interest prior to
enrolling in another trial."[@ref375]

"Efficacy outcomes were assessed using intention-to-treat analysis (ie,
the full set of all randomly assigned patients). Safety outcomes were
assessed using the safety analysis set of all randomly allocated
patients exposed to at least one dose of randomised
intervention."[@ref376]

"Efficacy analyses and other exploratory analyses were performed in the
full analysis set (defined as all patients randomly assigned to the
study, including those who did not receive a dose of study treatment).
Safety analyses were performed in the safety analysis set (defined as
patients who received at least one dose of study treatment). The per
protocol set was defined as all patients in the full analysis set who
complied with the protocol in terms of exposure to study treatment,
availability of tumour assessments, and absence of major protocol
deviations likely to affect efficacy outcomes. Sensitivity analyses of
the primary endpoint were performed on the per protocol analysis
set."[@ref377]

"The primary analysis population was defined as all participants who
completed baseline and 36-week assessments. The primary analysis of the
primary outcome, AMCA \[amended motor club assessment\] score at 36
weeks, followed a modified intention-to-treat approach, regardless of
compliance to the intervention, but did exclude patients who were deemed
ineligible after randomisation, those who withdrew from the trial and
were unwilling for their previously collected data to be used, or those
who did not provide baseline and week 36 measurements."[@ref378]

## Explanation

A key strength of a randomised trial design is the avoidance of bias
when randomly allocating trial participants to interventions. To
preserve the benefits of randomisation, all randomised participants are
included in the analysis and retained in the group to which they were
allocated. Meeting these two conditions defines an intention-to-treat
analysis---which is widely recommended as the preferred analysis
strategy.[@ref379; @ref380; @ref381] However, strict adherence to an
intention-to-treat analysis is often difficult to achieve owing to
missing outcomes for some trial participants (item 21c) or non-adherence
to the trial intervention protocol. While imputation of missing outcomes
would allow an intention-to-treat analysis, it does not guarantee an
avoidance of bias except under strong assumptions about the missing data
which may be unknown.

Various strategies for performing intention-to-treat analyses in the
presence of missing outcome data are available.[@ref382] When the number
of missing outcomes is not large, the analysis population could be all
randomised participants with outcome observed (known as an "available
case" population) under a plausible missing data mechanism, and
sensitivity analyses could be performed exploring departures from this
assumption (thereby using all randomised participants at least in
sensitivity analyses).[@ref382] Concerns may arise when the frequency or
the causes of dropping out differ between the intervention groups.
Striving for intention-to-treat analysis by imputing values for
participants with missing outcomes may lead to use of inadequate methods
such as last observation carried forward.[@ref382; @ref383; @ref384]
[@ref385]

Regardless of whether all randomised participants (completely observed
outcomes or imputed outcomes) or a subset of randomised participants
with observed outcomes are included in the primary analysis, the
analysis population should be described. Authors often describe
performing analyses on a "modified intention-to-treat" population to
cover departures from a strict intention-to-treat that excludes
participants who did not adequately adhere to the protocol such that
they did not receive some minimum amount of the intervention---in such
cases, what defines the minimum amount of the intervention should be
explained (eg, those participants receiving at least one dose of the
medication). It is also common to include analyses based on a per
protocol population, which includes participants completing the study
with no major protocol deviations. Excluding participants may compromise
the randomisation and lead to biased estimates of treatment effects if
appropriate methods are not used. Other analysis populations are
possible (eg, a safety population), and their rationale and definition
should be explained. Thus, authors should clearly define which
participants are included in each analysis and in which intervention
group and avoid terms such as "modified intention-to-treat" or "per
protocol" analysis.