---
id: statistical-methods-missing-data
title: 21c. Missing Data
summary:
    text: How missing data were handled in the analysis.
---

## What to write

How missing data were handled in the analysis

## Examples

"Regarding the multiple imputation procedure, briefly, for each outcome,
the analysis model used was a linear regression with treatment arm,
baseline outcome, and ethnicity (randomization stratifier) as
explanatory variables. The imputation models contained all the variables
of the analysis model(s) as well as factors associated with missingness:
age (identified empirically to predict missingness, P = .03) and
adherence (number of doses taken of either vitamin D or placebo,
P \< .001)."[@ref386]

"To consider the potential impact of missing data on trial conclusions,
we used multiple imputation (data missing at random) and sensitivity
analysis (data not missing at random). Multiple imputation by chained
equations was performed using the "mi impute chained" command in Stata.
We used a linear regression model to impute missing outcomes for the HOS
ADL \[activities of daily living subscale of the hip outcome score\] at
eight months post-randomisation. Variables in the imputation model
included all covariates in the analysis model (baseline HOS ADL
(continuous), age (continuous), and sex). In addition, we included other
variables that were thought to be predictive of the outcome (lateral
centre-edge angle, maximum α angle, Kellgren-Lawrence grade, and
baseline HADS score). Imputations were run separately by treatment arm
and based on a predictive mean matching approach, choosing at random one
of the five HOS ADL values with the closest predicted scores. Missing
data in the covariates that were included in the multiple imputation
model were imputed simultaneously (multiple imputation by chained
equation approach). Sensitivity analysis was performed using the
"rctmiss" command in Stata, and we considered scenarios where
participants with missing data in each arm were assumed to have outcomes
that were up to 9 points worse than when data were missing at
random."[@ref242]

"Analyses for the 2 primary outcomes compared each treatment with usual
care using multiple imputation to handle missing data and a
Bonferroni-corrected 2-tailed type I error of .025. We performed 20
imputations with a fully conditional specification using Proc MI in SAS.
Imputation was performed with the following prespecified variables: age,
study group, study site, clinic, sex, race and ethnicity, body mass
index, exercise frequency at baseline, education, employment status,
smoking status, other medical conditions at baseline, number of
medications used for spine pain at baseline, duration of pain at
baseline, number of previous pain episodes, STarT Back score, baseline
ODI, baseline self-efficacy, baseline EQ-5D-5L, and scores for
patient-reported outcomes at every follow-up point (ODI \[Oswestry
Disability Index\], cost, Lorig et al self-efficacy scale, and EQ-5D-5L
\[EuroQol 5-dimensional 5-level questionnaire\]). Each imputed data set
was analyzed separately using Proc GENMOD in SAS (with an identity link
and normally distributed errors for ODI and a log link and
Poisson-distributed errors for spine-related spending)."[@ref387]

"Missing peak V̇o2 \[oxygen consumption\] data at week 20, regardless of
the type of intercurrent event, was imputed using multiple imputation
methodology under the missing at random assumption for the primary
analysis. Sensitivity analyses were performed by exploring a missing not
at random assumption in the imputation of peak V̇o2. The imputation model
used a regression multiple imputation, which includes treatment group,
baseline respiratory exchange ratio, persistent atrial fibrillation (yes
or no), age, sex, baseline peak V̇o2, baseline hemoglobin level, baseline
estimated glomerular filtration rate, baseline body weight, baseline
KCCQ \[Kansas City cardiomyopathy questionnaire\] total symptom score,
baseline NYHA \[New York Heart Association\] class, and baseline average
daily activity units (refers to 10 hours of wearing during the awake
time for ≥7 days unless otherwise specified). Treatment group,
persistent atrial fibrillation (yes or no), baseline NYHA class, and sex
were treated as categorical variables. Fifty imputed data sets were
generated. Each of the imputed data sets was analyzed using the analysis
of covariance model of the primary analysis. Least square mean (LSM)
treatment difference and the standard error were combined using Rubin's
rules to produce an LSM estimate of the treatment difference, its 95% CI
\[confidence interval\], and P value for the test of null hypothesis of
no treatment effect."[@ref388]

"Multiple imputation was preplanned for the primary outcome measure in
the case of missing data; however, because there were no missing data
relating to ventilator-free days, imputation was not required."[@ref389]

## Explanation

Missing data are common when conducting medical research. Collecting
data on all study participants can be challenging even in a trial that
has mechanisms to maximise data capture. Missing values can occur in
either the outcome or in one or more covariates, or usually both. There
are many reasons why missing values occur in the outcome. Patients may
stop participating in the trial, withdraw consent for further data
collection, or fail to attend follow-up visits; all of which could be
related to the treatment allocation, specific (prognostic) factors, or
experiencing a specific health outcome.[@ref390] Missing values could
also occur in baseline variables, such that all the necessary data
needed to conduct the trial have been only partially recorded. Despite
the ubiquity of missing data in medical research, the reporting of
missing data and how they are handled in the analyses is poor.[@ref391]
[@ref392; @ref393; @ref394; @ref395; @ref396; @ref397; @ref398]
[@ref399]

Many trialists exclude patients without an observed outcome. Once any
randomised participants are excluded, the analysis is not strictly an
intention-to-treat analysis. Most randomised trials have some missing
observations. Trialists effectively must choose between omitting the
participants without final outcome data, imputing their missing outcome
data, or using model based approaches such as fitting a linear mixed
model to repeated measures data.[@ref371] A complete case (or available
case) analysis includes only those participants whose outcome is known.
While a few missing outcomes will not cause a problem, many trials have
more than 10% of randomised patients with missing outcomes.[@ref391]
[@ref392; @ref393; @ref394; @ref395; @ref396; @ref397; @ref398]
This common situation will result in loss of power by reducing the
sample size, and bias may well be introduced if being lost to follow-up
is related to a participant's response to treatment. There should be
concern when the frequency or the causes of dropping out differ between
the intervention groups.

Participants with missing outcomes can be included in the analysis if
their outcomes are imputed (ie, their outcomes are estimated from other
information that was collected) or if using a model based approach.
Imputing the values of missing data allows the analysis to potentially
conform to intention-to-treat analysis but requires strong assumptions,
which may be hard to justify. Simple imputation methods are appealing,
but their use may be inadvisable as they fail to account for uncertainty
introduced by missing data and may lead to invalid inferences (eg,
estimated standard errors for the treatment effect will be too
small).[@ref400] For randomised trials with missing data within repeated
measures data, model based approaches such as fitting a linear mixed
model can be used to estimate the treatment effect at the final time
point which is valid under a missing-at-random assumption. A model is
fit at a (limited) number of time points following randomisation, by
including fixed effects for time and randomised group and their
interaction.[@ref371]

Another approach that is sometimes used is known as "last observation
carried forward," in which missing final values of the outcome variable
are replaced by the last known value before the participant was lost to
follow-up. Although this method might appear appealing through its
simplicity, the underlying assumption will rarely be valid, so the
method may introduce bias, and makes no allowance for the uncertainty of
imputation. The approach of last observation carried forward has been
severely criticised.[@ref383; @ref384; @ref401] Sensitivity analyses
should be reported to understand the extent to which the results of the
trial depend on the missing data assumptions and subsequent analysis
(item 21d).[@ref402] When the findings from the sensitivity analyses are
consistent with the results from the primary analysis (eg, complete case
for the primary analysis and multiple imputation for a sensitivity
analysis), trialists can be reassured that the missing data assumptions
and associated methods had little impact on the trial results.[@ref403]

Regardless of what data are missing, how such data are to be analysed
and reported needs to be carefully planned. Authors should provide a
description on how missing data were handled in sufficient detail to
allow for the analysis to be reproduced (in principle; see the box below).

::: {.callout-note collapsed=true}
### Guidance for reporting analytical approaches to handle missing data (adapted from Hussain et al[@ref404])

#### Methods

1.  Report any strategies used to reduce missing data throughout the
    trial process.

2.  Report if and/or how the original sample size calculation accounted
    for missing data (item 16a) and the justification for these
    decisions. Report if and/or how the sample size was reassessed
    during the course of the trial (item 16b).

3.  Report the assumption about the missing data mechanism for the
    primary analysis and the justification for this choice, for all
    outcomes. For multiple imputation methods, report[@ref405]:

    - What variables were included in the imputation procedure?

    - How were non-normally distributed and binary/categorical
        variables dealt with?

    - If statistical interactions were included in the final analyses
        (item 21a), were they also included in imputation models?

    - Was imputation done separately or by randomised group?

    - How many imputed datasets were created?

    - How were results from different imputed datasets combined?

4.  Report the method used to handle missing data for the primary
    analysis (eg, complete case, multiple imputation) and the
    justification for the methods chosen, for all outcomes. Include
    whether or which auxiliary variables were collected and used.

5.  Report the assumptions about the missing data mechanism (eg, missing
    at random) and methods used to conduct the missing data sensitivity
    analyses for all outcomes, and the justification for the assumptions
    and methods chosen.

6.  Report how data that were truncated due to death or other causes
    were handled with a justification for the method(s) (if relevant).

#### Results

1.  Report the numbers and proportions of missing data in each trial
    arm.

2.  Report the reasons for missing data in each trial arm.

3.  Report a comparison of the characteristics of those with observed
    and missing data.

4.  Report the primary analysis based on the primary assumption about
    the missing data mechanism, for all outcomes.

5.  Report results of the missing data sensitivity analyses for all
    outcomes. As a minimum, a summary of the missing data sensitivity
    analyses should be reported in the main paper with the full results
    in the supplementary material.

#### Discussion

1.  Discuss the impact of missing data on the interpretation of
    findings, considering both internal and external validity. For
    multiple imputation, include whether the variables included in the
    imputation model make the missing-at-random assumption plausible.
:::