---
id: statistical-methods-additional-analyses
title: 21d. Additional Analyses
summary:
    text: Methods for any additional analyses (eg, subgroup and sensitivity analyses), distinguishing pre-specified from post hoc.
---

## What to write

Methods for any additional analyses (eg, subgroup and sensitivity analyses), distinguishing prespecified from post hoc

## Examples

"We conducted prespecified sensitivity analyses to examine the effect of
our assumption that participants who withdrew or were lost to follow-up
returned to smoking: (1) a complete case analysis and (2) multiple
imputation to impute missing smoking abstinence and reduction data.
Multiple imputation was performed using the fully conditional
specification approach with 5 imputed data sets and results combined
using the Rubin rules (eMethods in Supplement 2). Other prespecified
sensitivity analyses examined the effect of imbalances in baseline
participant characteristics using multiple logistic regression models to
estimate odds ratios and 95% CIs \[confidence intervals\] for point
prevalence abstinence at 12 and 24 weeks, adjusting for characteristics
for which the absolute value of the standardized difference was 0.1 or
greater. We conducted additional post hoc analyses: (1) to examine
potential clustering by site using generalized linear mixed models with
a random effect for site to estimate odds ratios and 95% CIs for point
prevalence abstinence at 12 and 24 weeks, and (2) to compare the
baseline characteristics of participants with self-reported smoking data
at 12 weeks (primary end point) with those of participants without
self-reported smoking data. Statistical analyses were performed using
SAS statistical software (version 9.4; SAS Institute)."[@ref406]

"Several prespecified sensitivity analyses were done. First, assessment
of the effect of missing data on the primary outcome was done using
multiple imputation by chained equations method (MICE). This imputation
model included all the variables in the primary ITT \[intention to
treat\] analysis, secondary outcomes (from each timepoint), and baseline
variables associated with the missingness of the primary outcome. 20
imputed datasets were generated and combined using Rubin's rules, and
the primary analysis model was then repeated using the imputed data. We
specified a priori the following potential exploratory analyses to
assess effect modification on the primary outcome: baseline
hypertension, baseline MMSE \[Mini-Mental State Examination\], baseline
age, time since Alzheimer's disease diagnosis, baseline brain volume,
and change in systolic blood pressure. A post-hoc analysis was also done
to investigate for differences between aggregated and disaggregated MRI
\[magnetic resonance imaging\] data (according to MRI scanner modality)
for the primary outcomes."[@ref407]

"Four sensitivity analyses were done examining the primary outcome:
restricted to women who had not received antibiotics in the 7 days
before delivery, to examine whether any masking of a prophylactic effect
was occurring by inclusion of pretreated women; excluding women
prescribed antibiotics (other than the trial intervention) within the
first 24 h after delivery, and who might therefore already have had an
infection at the time of administration of the intervention; restricted
to women whose primary outcome was obtained between weeks 6 and 10 after
delivery to exclude any biases by over-reporting of outcomes from data
returned at a later timepoint or under-reporting of outcomes in data
returned at an earlier timepoint; and including centre as a random
effect. No subgroup analyses were planned; however, we did a post-hoc
subgroup analysis of the primary outcome according to mode of birth
(forceps or vacuum extraction). More stringent 99% CIs \[confidence
intervals\] are presented for the estimate of RR \[risk ratio\] for this
post-hoc subgroup analysis."[@ref408]

"A prespecified subgroup analysis for the primary outcomes, testing for
an interaction for baseline anxiety, depression, and opioid use, defined
using their median values was completed. Prespecified sensitivity
analyses for the primary outcome, excluding participants included in
process evaluation interviews, adjusting for the imbalance of death, and
split by baseline pain disorders were also completed. Because of the
potential for type I error due to multiple comparisons, findings for
analyses of secondary end points should be interpreted as exploratory.
Statistical analyses were conducted using Stata version 16.1
(StataCorp)."[@ref409]

## Explanation

Sensitivity analyses can be important additional analyses to examine the
robustness of the primary trial results under a range of assumptions
about the data, methods, and models that differ from those of the
primary analysis. When the findings from a sensitivity analysis are
consistent with the primary trial findings, trialists can be confident
that any assumptions in the primary analysis had little
impact---strengthening the trial results. Morris and colleagues provide
a principled approach to guide any sensitivity analyses by posing three
questions to trialists: does the proposed sensitivity analysis address
the same question as the primary analysis; is it possible for the
proposed sensitivity analysis to return a different result to the
primary analysis; and if the results do differ, is there any uncertainty
as to which will be believed.[@ref402; @ref410]

Subgroup analyses are another set of additional analyses that are widely
carried out and reported.[@ref411; @ref412; @ref413; @ref414] Here,
the focus is on those analyses that look for evidence of a difference in
treatment effect in complementary subgroups (eg, older and younger
participants), a comparison known as a test of interaction.[@ref415]
Empirical analyses of subgroup difference claims for factors such as
age, sex, race, ethnicity, and other factors show selective reporting,
frequent lack of proper statistical support, and poor independent
corroboration.[@ref416; @ref417; @ref418]

A common but misleading approach is to compare P values for separate
analyses of the treatment effect in each group. Categorising continuous
variables to create subgroups is often done for simplicity and because
it is perceived as easier to understand and communicate. Major
limitations of the approach include the splitting of a continuous
variable into discrete subgroups by arbitrarily chosen cut-off points
that lack clinical or biological plausibility, which loses information,
and thus reduces statistical power.[@ref419] Choosing cut-off points
based on achieving statistical significance should be avoided. It is
incorrect to infer a subgroup effect (interaction) from one significant
(in one subgroup) and one non-significant P value (in another subgroup).
The rationale for any subgroups should be outlined (including how they
are defined), along with whether the subgroups were specified a priori
in the protocol or statistical analysis plan or were done post hoc.
Because of the high risk for spurious findings, subgroup analyses are
often discouraged. Post hoc subgroup comparisons (analyses done after
looking at the data) are especially likely not to be confirmed by
further studies. Most of these analyses do not have substantial
credibility.

An alternative and stronger approach, which avoids the need to specify
cut-off points to assess the interaction between a continuous variable
(eg, age) and treatment effect would be to fit a regression model, which
can be presented graphically to examine how the estimated treatment
effects varies with the level of the variable.[@ref420] These analyses
are more complex, requiring model assumptions to capture the
relationship (linear or non-linear) between the variable and the
treatment effect. Authors should clearly describe the statistical
methods used to explore the treatment-covariate interaction.