---
id: recruitment-dates
title: 23a. Recruitment Dates
summary:
    title: 23a. Dates
    text: Dates defining the periods of recruitment and follow-up for outcomes of benefits and harms.
---

## What to write

Dates defining the periods of recruitment and follow-up for outcomes of benefits and harms

## Examples

"Age-eligible participants were recruited . . . from February 1993 to
September 1994 . . . Participants attended clinic visits at the time of
randomization (baseline) and at 6-month intervals for 3 years."[@ref429]

"The trial involved five visits: Visit 1 on day 1 (screening,
randomization and initial dosing), Visit 2 on day 2 (assessment of the
primary endpoint), Visit 3 on day 4 (assessment of efficacy and safety
parameters), Visit 4 on day 6 (end-of-treatment visit) and Visit 5 on
day 8 to day 10 (follow up by telephone interview). Patients were asked
to return all unused trial medication and their diaries at each
visit."[@ref430] In this example, the term "safety" is used as a
reference to harm outcomes; we recommend against the use of "safety";
preferable terms are "harms" or "adverse events."

## Explanation

Knowing when a study took place and over what period participants were
recruited places the study in historical context. Medical and surgical
treatments, including concurrent treatments, evolve continuously and may
affect the routine care given to participants during a trial. Thus, it
is important to report the periods of recruitment into the trial.
Knowing the rate at which participants were recruited may also be
useful, especially to other investigators.

The length of follow-up is not always a fixed period after
randomisation. In many randomised trials in which the outcome is time to
an event, follow-up of all participants is ended on a specific date.
This date should be given, and it is also useful to report the minimum,
maximum, and median duration of follow-up.[@ref431; @ref432] A review
of reports in oncology journals that used survival analysis, most of
which were not randomised trials,[@ref432] found that nearly 80% (104 of
132 reports) included the starting and ending dates for accrual of
patients, but only 24% (32 of 132 reports) also reported the date on
which follow-up ended.

Information on the periods of recruitment and follow-up may be different
for outcomes of benefits and harm.[@ref20] For example, the assessment
of harms might be planned to take place during the entire study through
non-systematic assessment, might occur during only part of the study
duration, might occur at specific time points using systematic or
non-systematic assessment, or might continue after the completion of
follow-up for the main efficacy outcome. Reporting the periods of
recruitment and follow-up for benefits and harms is important to allow
comprehensive and accurate interpretation of the trial's
results.[@ref20]