---
id: intervention-comparator-delivery-as-administered
title: 24a. Intervention and comparator as administered
summary:
    title: 24a. As Administered
    text: Intervention and comparator as they were actually administered (eg, where appropriate, who delivered the intervention/comparator, whether participants adhered, whether they were delivered as intended (fidelity)).
---

## What to write

## What to write

Intervention and comparator as they were actually administered (eg, where appropriate, who delivered the intervention/comparator, whether participants adhered, whether they were delivered as intended (fidelity))

## Examples

"Patients were randomly assigned to the P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy
group (aspirin plus a P2Y12 inhibitor for 3 months and thereafter a
P2Y12 inhibitor alone) or to the DAPT group (aspirin plus a P2Y12
inhibitor for at least 12 months) in a 1:1 ratio . . . Overall adherence
to the study protocol was 79.3% in the P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy group
and 95.2% in the DAPT group . . . The rates of P2Y12 inhibitor use were
similar in both groups: 96.4% at 6 months and 95.0% at 12 months in the
P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy group and 98.1% at 6 months and 96.6% at 12
months in the DAPT group. The median duration of aspirin was 96 days
(interquartile range, 88-118 days) in the P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy
group and 365 days (interquartile range, 363-365) in the DAPT group. The
proportion of patients receiving aspirin beyond 3 months in the P2Y12
inhibitor monotherapy group was 14.4% at 6 months and 8.9% at 12
months."[@ref440]

"Most participants received treatment as allocated \[@tbl-8\]. Across intervention groups, high protocol
adherence was achieved in terms of the delivery, type, and content for
the injection, progressive exercise, and best practice advice
interventions. 53 physiotherapists delivered corticosteroid injections
to 329 (97%) participants and three doctors to ten (3%) participants.
Progressive exercise was delivered by 104 physiotherapists to 339
participants and best practice advice was delivered by 83
physiotherapists to 324 participants. Two physiotherapists swapped
groups during the trial because of staffing issues and delivered both
interventions. We found no difference in attendance rates between those
receiving progressive exercise or best practice advice and those who
received the intervention in conjunction with corticosteroid injection
\[@tbl-8\]."[@ref114]



                                                  Best practice advice (n=174)   Injection and best practice advice (n=178)   Progressive exercise (n=174)   Injection and progressive exercise (n=182)
  ----------------------------------------------- ------------------------------ -------------------------------------------- ------------------------------ --------------------------------------------
  Injection received                              ---                          168 (94)                                     ---                          171 (94)
  Injection not received with reasons             ---                          10 (6)                                       ---                          11 (6)
  Received extra injection                        ---                          0                                            ---                          2 (1)
  Completed exercise treatment                    162 (93)                       162 (91)                                     138 (79)                       139 (76)
  Partial exercise completion                     ---                          ---                                        29 (17)                        33 (18)
  Median (IQR) number of sessions                 1 (1-1)                        1 (1-1)                                      4 (3-6)                        4 (3-5)
  Completed session 1                             162 (93)                       162 (91)                                     167 (96)                       172 (95)
  Completed session 2                             ---                          ---                                        161 (93)                       160 (88)
  Participants who received additional sessions   3 (2)                          5 (3)                                        3 (2)                          2 (1)

: Example of good reporting: Intervention received by treatment group Data are number (%) or participants unless stated otherwise. Adapted from Hopewell et al, 2021[@ref114]. IQR=interquartile range. {#tbl-8}


## Explanation

This new item has been added to the CONSORT 2025 checklist to address
the poor reporting of the intervention and comparator in randomised
trials.[@ref195; @ref198; @ref199; @ref200; @ref201; @ref214] For
example, in a review of 102 randomised trials evaluating bariatric
surgery, only 14% reported the intervention as implemented.[@ref441] A
review of 192 randomised trials assessing pharmacological treatments in
six major chronic diseases published in journals with high impact
factors showed that adherence to medication was reported in only one
third of the publications.[@ref442] A review of 100 randomised trial
reports published in general medical journals with high impact factors
highlighted that only 11% of the trials assessing long term
interventions and 38% of those assessing short term interventions
adequately reported treatment initiation and completeness of
treatment.[@ref209] A review of 111 randomised trials reports showed
that only 46% reported adherence results.[@ref443] A review of 94
placebo/sham controlled randomised trials published in high impact
journals showed that only 54% reported actual adherence or
fidelity.[@ref214]

There is frequently a gap between the intervention/comparator as planned
and described in the trial protocol and how the intervention/comparator
were actually administered. This gap could be related to poor fidelity,
which can be driven by the extent to which the intervention/comparator
are implemented as planned in the protocol by practitioners, and/or poor
adherence to treatment, defined as the extent to which participants
comply with the care providers' recommendations (eg, taking a drug,
placebo, behavioural change, doing exercises).[@ref209; @ref444] This
gap could also be related to the expected diversity in the
implementation of the intervention/comparator in clinical practice
particularly for complex interventions.

The gap between the intervention/comparator as planned and as delivered
also depends on how the trial was planned. In explanatory trials, the
aim is to estimate treatment effect under ideal circumstances. The
intervention/comparator are usually highly standardised with close
monitoring of fidelity and adherence to interventions and strategies to
increase them. Intensive efforts to maximise fidelity and adherence in
early phase trials or explanatory trials may lead to unrealistic,
inflated estimates of treatment benefit that cannot be reproduced under
real life circumstances.[@ref445; @ref446] Reporting the results of
this monitoring is essential to allow readers to interpret the study
results.

In contrast, pragmatic trials aim to determine treatment effect in
clinical conditions. The intervention and comparator are usually highly
flexible, and measurement of fidelity and adherence is unobstructive
with no strategies to maintain or improve them.

Reporting how the intervention/comparator were actually administered is
nevertheless crucial to allow readers to accurately interpret the trial
results. For example, in a large international randomised trial
comparing endarterectomy to medical management for patients with
symptomatic carotid artery stenosis, there were important differences in
the delay in receiving the surgical procedure which impacted the
outcomes.[@ref179]

Authors should provide details on who actually delivered the
intervention/comparator (number and expertise), how the
intervention/comparator were delivered, what was actually administered,
participants' adherence to treatment, and the caregiver's fidelity to
the intervention/comparator protocol where appropriate. Reporting
fidelity and adherence can be complex and vary according to the type of
intervention or comparator (eg, one-off, short term repeated, long term
repeated). Various deviations to the protocol can occur. Participants
might initiate the intervention/comparator but then discontinue the
intervention/comparator permanently and completely after a specific
period of time, discontinue temporarily, reduce the dose, or modify the
schedule.

More detailed information is available in TIDieR[@ref23] and the CONSORT
extension for non-pharmacological treatments[@ref22] (item 13).
