---
id: baseline-data
title: 25. Baseline Data
summary:
    text: A table showing baseline demographic and clinical characteristics for each group.
---

## What to write

A table showing baseline demographic and clinical characteristics for each group

## Example

See @tbl-10.[@ref453]


  Characteristic                                                                            Usual care (n=242)   Exercise (n=246)
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------- ------------------
  Mean (SD) age (years)                                                                     63.5 (11)            61.3 (12)
  Female sex                                                                                186 (76)             188 (76)
  Ethnic origin                                                                                                  
   White                                                                                    235 (98)             238 (97)
   Indian                                                                                   2 (1)                3 (1)
   Pakistani                                                                                1 (\<1)              ---
   Mixed                                                                                    1 (\<1)              3 (1)
   Other                                                                                    1 (\<1)              2 (1)
  Dominant in right hand                                                                    215 (90)             226 (92)
  Median (IQR) No of years since rheumatoid arthritis diagnosis, estimated by participant   10 (4-22)            10 (4-21)
  Median (IQR) baseline ESR                                                                 16 (8-28)            15 (7-28)
  Median (IQR) baseline CRP                                                                 6 (3-12)             5 (3-12)
  Drug treatment                                                                                                 
   Biological DMARD                                                                         52 (22)              51 (21)
   Combination non-biological DMARD                                                         53 (22)              72 (29)
   Single non-biological DMARD                                                              118 (49)             103 (42)
   Other drugs                                                                              19 (8)               19 (8)
  Mean (SD) MHQ                                                                                                  
   Overall hand function (both)                                                             52.1 (16.4)          52.1 (15.2)
   Activities of daily living (both)                                                        54.1 (25.0)          54.5 (24.5)
   Work                                                                                     48.4 (22.0)          48.2 (22.0)
   Pain                                                                                     51.4 (19.9)          51.9 (21.9)
   Aesthetics (both)                                                                        58.6 (22.1)          56.9 (22.0)
   Satisfaction (both)                                                                      43.5 (22.3)          43.9 (19.7)
   Overall score                                                                            50.9 (16.9)          50.6 (16.4)
  Mean (SD) SF-12 score                                                                                          
   Aggregate physical scale (PCS)                                                           34.5 (9.5)           33.8 (9.8)
   Aggregate mental scale (MCS)                                                             48.9 (11.0)          48.1 (10.7)

: Example of good reporting: Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics between study groups. Data are number (%) of participants unless stated otherwise. DMARD=disease-modifying drugs; ESR=erythrocyte sedimentation rate; IQR=interquartile range; MHQ=Michigan Hand Outcome Questionnaire; PCS=physical component score; MCS=mental component score; SD=standard deviation. Adapted from Lamb et al.[@ref453] {#tbl-10}

## Explanation

Although the eligibility criteria (item 12a) indicate who was eligible
for the trial, it is also important to know the characteristics of the
participants who were actually included. This information allows
readers, especially clinicians, to judge how relevant the results of a
trial might be to an individual patient. Participant baseline
demographics may include characteristics such as age, sex and/or
gender,[@ref182] place of residence, race and/or ethnicity, culture
and/or religion, language, occupation, education, or socioeconomic
status. Baseline clinical characteristics include those which are
identical, or closely related, to the trial outcomes.[@ref454]

Randomised trials aim to compare groups of participants that differ only
with respect to the intervention (treatment). Although proper random
assignment prevents selection bias, it does not guarantee similarity of
the groups at baseline. Any differences in baseline characteristics are,
however, the result of chance rather than bias.[@ref294] Important
demographic and clinical characteristics should be presented so that
readers can assess how similar the groups were at baseline. Baseline
data are especially valuable for outcomes that can also be measured at
the start of the trial (eg, blood pressure).

Baseline information is most efficiently presented in a table. For
continuous variables, such as weight or blood pressure, the variability
of the data should be reported, along with average values. Continuous
variables can be summarised for each group by the mean and standard
deviation. When continuous data have an asymmetrical distribution, a
preferable approach may be to quote the median and percentile values
(eg, the 25th and 75th percentiles).[@ref365] Standard errors and CIs
are not appropriate for describing variability---they are inferential
rather than descriptive statistics. Variables with a small number of
ordered categories (such as stages of disease I to IV) should not be
treated as continuous variables; instead, numbers and proportions should
be reported for each category.[@ref364; @ref365]

Significance testing of baseline differences is not recommended and
should not be reported.[@ref269; @ref294; @ref455] Such significance
tests assess the probability that observed baseline differences could
have occurred by chance; however, providing the randomisation has not
been subverted or comprised, any differences are caused by chance.
Unfortunately, such significance tests are still relatively
common.[@ref456; @ref457; @ref458] Such hypothesis testing is
superfluous and can mislead investigators and their readers.[@ref459]
Rather, comparisons at baseline should be based on consideration of the
prognostic strength of the variables measured and the magnitude of any
chance imbalances that have occurred.[@ref459]
