---
id: numbers-analysed-outcomes-estimation
title: 26. Numbers analysed, outcomes, and estimation
summary:
    text: |
        For each primary and secondary outcome, by group:

        * the number of participants included in the analysis.
        * the number of participants with available data at the outcome time point.
        * result for each group, and the estimated effect size and its precision (such as 95% confidence interval).
        * for binary outcomes, presentation of both absolute and relative effect size.
---

## What to write

Items for each primary and secondary outcome

For each primary and secondary outcome, by group:

- the number of participants included in the analysis

- the number of participants with available data at the outcome time
    point

- result for each group, and the estimated effect size and its
    precision (such as 95% CI)

- for binary outcomes, presentation of both absolute and relative
    effect size.

## Examples

"All principal analyses were based on the intention-to treat (ITT)
principle, analysing participants in the groups to which they were
randomly assigned irrespective of compliance with treatment
allocation."[@ref460]

See @tbl-11,[@ref123] @tbl-12,[@ref123] and @tbl-13.[@ref461]

  Outcome                                  Usual care    Exercise      Adjusted odds ratio (95% CI)
  ---------------------------------------- ------------- ------------- ------------------------------
  Acute and chronic postoperative pain\*                               
  Moderate to severe, 6 weeks              46/150 (31)   28/153 (18)   1.90 (1.02 to 3.52)
  Moderate to severe, 6 months             30/133 (23)   25/145 (17)   1.42 (0.72 to 2.84)
  Moderate to severe, 12 months            43/139 (31)   22/135 (16)   2.41 (1.24 to 4.70)
  Neuropathic pain, DN4 positive                                       
  6 weeks                                  21/150 (14)   24/153 (16)   0.73 (0.22 to 2.45)
  6 months                                 29/133 (22)   26/145 (18)   1.64 (0.63 to 4.23)
  12 months                                32/139 (23)   22/135 (16)   1.29 (0.45 to 3.69)
  Lymphoedema, LBCQ                                                    
  6 weeks                                  20/150 (13)   22/153 (14)   1.07 (0.52 to 2.24)
  6 months                                 32/133 (24)   29/145 (20)   0.82 (0.43 to 1.56)
  12 months                                36/139 (26)   33/135 (24)   1.17 (0.62 to 2.23)

: Example of good reporting: Summary results for each trial group (binary outcomes). Secondary outcomes of arm symptoms, and lymphoedema by treatment group. Data are number (%) unless stated otherwise. DN4=Douleur Neuropathique-4 (positive neuropathic pain=score \>3); LBCQ=Lymphoedema and Breast Cancer Questionnaire (positive symptoms=arm both heavy and swollen). Adapted from Bruce et al.[@ref123] Numerical rating scale: acute and chronic post-operative pain. Moderate to severe pain=4-10. {#tbl-11}


  Time point, analysis               Usual care                    Exercise                    Difference between groups (95% CI)\*   
  ---------------------------------- ------------ ------------- -- ---------- ------------- -- -------------------------------------- ----------------------
                                     No           Mean (SD)        No         Mean (SD)        Unadjusted                             Adjusted
  6 months, ITT                      125          20.8 (20.1)      134        18.0 (17.1)      2.76 (−1.79 to 7.31)                   4.60 (0.30 to 8.90)
  12 months, ITT (primary outcome)   138          23.7 (22.9)      132        16.3 (17.6)      7.34 (2.44 to 12.23)                   7.81 (3.17 to 12.44)

: Example of good reporting: Summary results for each trial group (continuous outcomes). Disability of Arm, Shoulder, Hand (DASH) scores by treatment group. Scores adjusted for age, baseline DASH, breast surgery, axillary surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. Mean differences in upper limb function favour exercise intervention. Adapted from Bruce et al.[@ref123] CI=confidence interval; ITT=intention to treat; SD=standard deviation. Absolute mean difference between treatment groups. {#tbl-12}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Primary outcome                                             Early administration (%) (n=1344)   Delayed selective administration (%) (n=1346)   Risk ratio\           Risk difference (95% CI)
                                                                                                                                                  (95% CI)              
  ----------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------------
  Death or oxygen dependence at "expected date of delivery"   31.9 (429)                          38.2 (514)                                      0.84 (0.75 to 0.93)   −6.3 (−9.9 to −2.7)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

: Example of good reporting: Absolute and relative effect sizes. Data are % (number) of participants, unless stated otherwise. Adapted from Sola et al.[@ref461] "The risk of oxygen dependence or death was reduced by 16% (95% CI 25% to 7%). The absolute difference was −6.3% (95% CI −9.9% to −2.7%); early administration to an estimated 16 babies would therefore prevent 1 baby dying or being long-term dependent on oxygen."[@ref461] CI=confidence interval. {#tbl-13}

## Explanation

For each primary and secondary outcome, the number of participants
included in each group is an essential element of the analyses. Although
the flow diagram (item 22a) should indicate the numbers of participants
included in the analysis of the primary outcome, the number of
participants with available data will often vary for different outcomes
and at different time points.

Missing data can introduce potential bias through different types of
participants being included in each treatment group. It can also reduce,
through loss of information, the power to detect a difference between
treatment groups if one exists (item 21c) and reduce the
generalisability of the trial findings.[@ref404] It is therefore
important to report the number of participants with available data for
each primary and secondary outcome and at each timepoint. Where
possible, it is also important to report the reason data were not
available, for example, if the participant did not attend follow-up
appointments, or if data were truncated because the participant
died.[@ref404] The extent and causes of missing data can vary. For
example, a systematic review of palliative care trials estimated that
23% of primary outcome data were not available[@ref462]; this compares
to a recent review of trials published in four top general medical
journals where the median percentage of participants with a missing
outcome was around 9%.[@ref392]

Trial results are often more clearly displayed in a table rather than in
the text, as shown in @tbl-11 and @tbl-12. For each outcome, results should be reported as a summary of the outcome in each group (eg, the number of
participants included in the analysis with or without the event and the
denominators, or the mean and standard deviation of measurements),
together with the contrast between the groups, known as the effect size.
For binary outcomes, the effect size could be the risk ratio (relative
risk), odds ratio, or risk difference; for survival time data, it could
be the hazard ratio or difference in median survival time; and for
continuous data, it is usually the difference in means.

For all outcomes, authors should provide a CI to indicate the precision
(uncertainty) of the estimated effect size.[@ref364; @ref463] A 95% CI
is conventional, but occasionally other levels are used. Most journals
require or strongly encourage the use of CIs.[@ref464] They are
especially valuable in relation to differences that do not meet
conventional statistical significance, for which they often indicate
that the result does not rule out an important clinical difference. The
use of CIs has increased markedly in recent years, although not in all
medical specialties.[@ref465] A common error is the presentation of
separate CIs for the outcome in each group rather than for the treatment
effect.[@ref465] Although P values may be provided in addition to CIs,
results should not be reported solely as P values.[@ref466; @ref467]
Results should be reported for all planned primary and secondary
outcomes and at each time point, not just for analyses that were
statistically significant or thought to be interesting. Selective
reporting within studies is a widespread and serious problem.[@ref51]
[@ref468]

When the primary outcome is binary, both the relative effect (risk ratio
(relative risk) or odds ratio), and the absolute effect (risk
difference) should be reported (with CIs) (@tbl-13), as neither the relative measure nor the
absolute measure alone gives a complete picture of the effect and its
implications. Different audiences may prefer either relative or absolute
risk, but both clinicians and lay people tend to overestimate the effect
when it is presented solely in terms of relative risk.[@ref469]
[@ref470; @ref471] The magnitude of the risk difference is less
generalisable to other populations than the relative risk since it
depends on the baseline risk in the unexposed group, which tends to vary
across populations. For diseases where the outcome is common, a relative
risk near unity might nonetheless indicate clinically important
differences in public health terms. In contrast, a large relative risk
when the outcome is rare may not be so important for public health
(although it may be important to an individual in a high risk category).
For both binary and survival time data, expressing the results also as
the number needed to treat for benefit or harm can be helpful.[@ref472]
[@ref473]
