---
id: harms
title: 27. Harms
summary:
    text: All harms or unintended events in each group.
---

## What to write

All harms or unintended events in each group

## Example

"Few women vomited after drug administration. 12 (0.2%) of 6685
sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine, 19 (0.3%) of 7014
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine, and 23 (0.3%) of 6849
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine plus azithromycin treatment courses were
vomited within 30 min \[@tbl-14\]. One
(0.1%) of 1552 women in the sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine group, two (0.1%)
of 1558 in the dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine group, and four (0.3%) of
1556 in the dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine plus azithromycin group
vomited after their first course of treatment (the only course when
azithromycin was coadministered with dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine;
@tbl-14). All three regimens were well
tolerated (\[@tbl-14\] . . . ), but
vomiting, nausea, and dizziness were more common in the first 3 days
after dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine (13 \[3.2%\], 14 \[3.4%\], and 15
\[3.7%\] of 410 women visited at home, respectively) than
sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine (one \[0.3%\], one \[0.3%\], and zero \[0%\]
of 384 women visited at home, respectively; appendix pp 20--21). The
addition of azithromycin to dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine was
associated with significantly more vomiting than with
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine alone (p=0.0033; \[@tbl-14\])."[@ref196]

  Endpoint                                                                      Treatment                                                    
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------- -------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------
                                                                                Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine   Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine   Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine plus azithromycin
  **Adverse events**                                                                                                                         
  Dizziness                                                                     4 (0.8)                     51 (9.5)                         38 (7.2)
  Vomiting                                                                      4 (0.8)                     41 (7.7)                         71 (13.5)
  Nausea                                                                        2 (0.4)                     44 (8.2)                         35 (6.7)
  Abdominal pain                                                                6 (1.1)                     11 (2.1)                         14 (2.7)
  Diarrhoea                                                                     2 (0.4)                     5 (0.9)                          6 (1.1)
  Headache                                                                      12 (2.3)                    17 (3.2)                         18 (3.4)
  Rash                                                                          0 (0.0)                     2 (0.4)                          0 (0.0)
  **Serious adverse events and grade 3-4 adverse events (in pregnant women)**                                                                
  Any                                                                           95 (17.7)                   79 (14.8)                        92 (16.9)
  Maternal mortality\*                                                          1/1553 (0.1)                2/1561 (0.1)                     3/1557 (0.2)
  **By system organ class**                                                                                                                  
  Blood and lymphatic system disorders                                          2 (0.4)                     0 (0.0)                          2 (0.4)

: Example of good reporting: Safety and tolerability endpoints (incidence
measures, events (incidence per person year at risk) or prevalence. Data
are number (%) unless stated otherwise. Adapted from Madanitsa et al.[@ref196] Number (%)/total number. {#tbl-14}

## Explanation

Readers need information about the harms as well as the benefits of
interventions to make rational and balanced decisions. Randomised trials
offer an excellent opportunity for providing harms data, although they
cannot detect differences in uncommon or rare harms between treatment
groups. The existence and nature of adverse effects can have a major
impact on whether a particular intervention will be deemed acceptable
and useful. Not all reported adverse events observed during a trial are
necessarily a consequence of the intervention; some may be a consequence
of the condition being treated. Nevertheless, they all need to be
reported.

Many reports of randomised trials provide inadequate information on
harms. A comparison between harm data submitted to the trials database
of the National Cancer Institute, which sponsored the trials, and the
information reported in journal articles found that low grade adverse
events were under-reported in journal articles. High grade events
(Common Toxicity Criteria grades 3 to 5) were reported inconsistently in
the articles and the information regarding attribution to
investigational drugs was incomplete.[@ref474] Moreover, a review of
trials published in six general medical journals in 2006 to 2007 found
that while 89% of 133 reports mentioned adverse events, no information
on severe adverse events and withdrawal of patients owing to an adverse
event was given in 27% and 48% of articles, respectively.[@ref475] In a
later review of 196 randomised trials of invasive pain treatments
published in six major journals, 76% provided the denominators for
analyses on harms and 85% reported the absolute risk per arm and per
adverse event type, grade, and seriousness, and presented appropriate
metrics.[@ref476]

For non-systematically assessed harms, reporting can be more complex as
the information is not standardised. A common approach is to code the
event declared by participants. Authors should report the coding system
used, whether coding was prespecified in the protocol, in the
statistical analysis plan, or post hoc, and whether coding was performed
by researchers blinded to the treatment allocated. In addition, there is
a risk of under-reporting and selective non-reporting of harms
particularly for non-systematically assessed harms. A reanalysis of
individual participant data from six randomised trials of gabapentin
found evidence of important harms that were not disclosed in the
published reports but identified after data sharing and
reanalysis.[@ref477] Sharing of de-identified individual participant
data may be needed to be able to adequately synthesise this information,
for example for inclusion in a systematic review.[@ref231; @ref235]
[@ref236]

Authors should report for each group, the number of participants at
risk, the number of deaths, the number of participants withdrawn due to
harms, the number of participants with at least one harm event, and the
number of events, if appropriate. Where appropriate, the estimated
effect size with its precision (such as 95% CIs) should be reported
including both absolute and relative effects for binary outcomes. It is
important to separate the reporting of systematically and
non-systematically assessed harms. Systematically assessed harms should
be reported even if zero events were identified. It should also be clear
whether the authors are reporting the number of participants with at
least one harm event or the number of events per unit of time at risk
and whether recurrent events were included. The number of participants
withdrawn because of harms should also be reported for each group.
Finally, results should be reported for all harms. We strongly
discourage the use of thresholds or criteria to select which harms
should be reported. All harms could be detailed in supplementary
materials.

We recommend reporting the results in a table with the results for each
trial arm.[@ref478] More detailed information can be found in the
CONSORT statement extension for harms, which was updated in
2022.[@ref20]
