---
id: interpretation
title: 29. Interpretation
summary:
    text: Interpretation consistent with results, balancing benefits and harms, and considering other relevant evidence.
---

## What to write

Interpretation consistent with results, balancing benefits and harms, and considering other relevant evidence

## Example

"In this trial, which compared standard of care with monthly IPTp
\[intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy\] with
sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine with monthly IPTp with
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine and monthly IPTp with
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine plus azithromycin, the use of
dihydroartemisinin-- piperaquine was associated with reductions in
clinical malaria, malaria infection detected by microscopy during
pregnancy, and placental malaria at the time of birth. However, despite
these reductions in malaria, the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes
(composite primary endpoint) was significantly lower in the
sulfadoxine-- pyrimethamine group than in both
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine groups . . .

"In a previous meta-analysis a modest, but nonsignificant, reduction of
17% in the number of adverse pregnancy outcomes favouring
dihydroartemisinin-- piperaquine versus sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine was
reported . . . These findings led WHO \[World Health Organization\] to
recommend larger definitive studies to determine whether IPTp with
dihydroartemisinin--piperaquine improves adverse pregnancy outcomes
compared with sulfadoxine-- pyrimethamine in areas with high
sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine resistance. Our results are consistent with
those from a third trial in eastern Uganda, which showed that monthly
IPTp with dihydroartemisinin-- piperaquine did not decrease the number
of adverse pregnancy outcomes among livebirths or reduce fetal loss
compared with monthly IPTp with sulfadoxine--pyrimethamine . . . All of
these trials, including ours, show that dihydroartemisinin-- piperaquine
is the superior antimalarial, resulting in 40--90% fewer malaria
infections during pregnancy."[@ref196]

## Explanation

A good discussion section of a completed randomised trial should start
with a brief summary of the trial results, balancing both benefits and
harms of the intervention. The discussion sections of scientific reports
are often filled with rhetoric supporting the authors' findings[@ref486]
and provide little measured argument of the pros and cons of the study
and its results. Indeed, some discussion sections can be overly
optimistic when discussing the trial findings (interpretation bias;
spin).[@ref33; @ref487; @ref488; @ref489] Authors need to guard
against such behaviours, as they diminish the rigour of the scientific
effort and may result in a loss of trust by readers.

Readers will also want to know how the trial results relate to those of
other randomised trials. This can best be achieved by including a
published systematic review in the results or discussion section of the
report.[@ref490; @ref491] This might be an easy ask for some authors as
a systematic review might have been part of the rationale for conducting
the trial. However, for others, such synthesis may be impractical, and
quoting and discussing any existing systematic reviews of similar trials
may be more appropriate. One recent estimate suggests that nearly 80
systematic reviews are published daily.[@ref492] Discussing trial
findings in the context of results from any systematic reviews will help
readers assess whether the results of the randomised trial are similar
to those of other trials in the same topic area and whether participants
are similar across studies. Reports of randomised trials have often not
dealt adequately with these points.[@ref490] Several methods to address
the issue of setting new trial findings within the context of previous
research have been proposed.[@ref491] Where conducting a new updated
systematic review is not practical, adding the new trial result to the
previous systematic review is a much simpler alternative.

We recommend that at a minimum, the discussion should be as systematic
and objective as possible and be based on a comprehensive search, rather
than being limited to studies that support the results of the current
trial.[@ref493; @ref494]
