---
id: trial-registration
title: 2. Trial Registration
summary:
    text: Name of trial registry, identifying number (with URL) and date of registration.
---


## What to write

Name of trial registry, identifying number (with URL) and date of registration

## Example

"This study was registered in the Iranian Registry of Clinical Trials
under the code IRCT20150531022498N30: <https://en.irct.ir/trial/41031>.
Registered on July 26, 2019."[@ref47]

## Explanation

The consequences of non-publication of entire trials (ie, publication
bias),[@ref48; @ref49; @ref50] and of selective reporting of outcomes
and analyses within trials, have been well documented.[@ref51; @ref52]
[@ref53] For almost 40 years, there have been growing calls to address
these practices. Today, a ubiquitous view recommends trial registration
as the best practice to achieve this goal, and inform policymakers and
potential participants about ongoing trials. Registering clinical
trials, before any assignment of participants, with unique trial
identification numbers and other basic information about the trial so
that essential details are made publicly available, is a minimum best
practice.[@ref54; @ref55; @ref56; @ref57] Serious problems of
withholding data[@ref58] led to renewed efforts to ensure registration
of randomised trials. The World Health Organization (WHO) states that
"the registration of all interventional trials is a scientific, ethical
and moral responsibility."[@ref59]

In September 2004, the ICMJE established a policy that it would only
consider trials for publication if they had been registered before the
enrolment of the first participant.[@ref60] This policy resulted in a
substantial increase in the number of trials being registered.[@ref61]
However, some trials are still not registered.[@ref49] The ICMJE gives
[guidance on acceptable registries](https://www.icmje.org/about-icmje/faqs/clinical-trials-registration/) and also accepts registration in [WHO primary registries](https://www.who.int/clinical-trials-registry-platform/network/primary-registries)
and [ClinicalTrials.gov](https://www.clinicaltrials.gov). Registers charging a fee to view their content
should be avoided to ensure equity of access for everyone, including
patients and the public.

The Transparency and Openness Promotion (TOP) guidelines, endorsed and
used by thousands of journals, recommends trial registration.[@ref62] In
a survey of 168 high impact factor medical journals' "Instructions to
authors" in 2014, 78 journals stated that all recent clinical trials
must be registered as a requirement of submission to that
journal.[@ref63] A more recent survey in 2019 of surgical journals
publishing randomised trials found that 53 of 82 journals mandated
prospective registration.[@ref64]

Despite recommendations, and mandates in some jurisdictions for clinical
trialists to register their trial and evidence that registration deters
selective reporting, this is still not happening universally.[@ref65]
[@ref66] Authors should provide the name of the registry, the trial's
associated registration number, date of registration and, where
possible, the URL for the trial's registration. We recommend that
authors also report whether (or when) the trial results are available on
the associated trial register.

Despite the considerable increase in clinical trial registration, there
is a strong body of evidence showing the lack of access to trial
results.[@ref67; @ref68; @ref69; @ref70] The latest version of the
Declaration of Helsinki states that "Researchers have a duty to make
publicly available the results of their research on human participants
and are accountable for the timeliness, completeness, and accuracy of
their reports . . . Negative and inconclusive as well as positive
results must be published or otherwise made publicly available." In
2015, WHO published a new statement on the public disclosure of trial
results, which requests that "the key outcomes are to be made publicly
available within 12 months of study completion by posting to the results
section of the primary clinical trial registry. Where a registry is used
without a results database available, the results should be posted on a
free-to-access, publicly available, searchable institutional website of
the Regulatory Sponsor, Funder or Principal Investigator." Some
legislations are also in place in the US, UK, and Europe requesting the
posting of trial results on clinical trials registry within 12 months
after study completion.[@ref71; @ref72; @ref73]

Authors should indicate whether the trial results are publicly posted to
the trial registry, as a preprint (with URL citation) or as published
articles (with citations).
