---
id: limitations
title: 30. Limitations
summary:
    text: Trial limitations, addressing sources of potential bias, imprecision, generalisability, and, if relevant, multiplicity of analyses.
---

## What to write

Trial limitations, addressing sources of potential bias, imprecision, generalisability, and, if relevant, multiplicity of analyses

## Examples

"The preponderance of male patients (85%) is a limitation of our study .
. . We used bare-metal stents, since drug-eluting stents were not
available until late during accrual. Although the latter factor may be
perceived as a limitation, published data indicate no benefit (either
short-term or long-term) with respect to death and myocardial infarction
in patients with stable coronary artery disease who receive drug-eluting
stents, as compared with those who receive bare-metal stents."[@ref495]

"Our study had several limitations. The early changes to the protocol to
accommodate patients with a shorter injury history (but still not acute)
to improve recruitment altered the characteristics of the study
population. Overall, patients had less long-standing injury than was
originally planned. Moreover, the study addressed a deliberately
specific population of patients who continued to have ACL injury-related
symptoms of instability and had not undergone any previous formal
treatment. Another potential limitation is the proportion of patients
who did not undergo surgical reconstruction, despite allocation to that
group. The true benefit of surgical reconstruction could be somewhat
greater than the ITT analysis suggests. The 18-month follow-up period
ideally could have been longer but was constrained by various factors
including funding. Notwithstanding, most patients had established their
level of instability at this timepoint since being included in the
trial. The trial design and analysis accounted for delayed surgery in
both groups."[@ref460]

## Explanation

An essential part of a good discussion section is summarising the
limitations of the trial. Limitations are frequently omitted from
research reports[@ref496]; identification and discussion of the
weaknesses of a study have particular importance.

Some journals have attempted to remedy this problem by encouraging more
structure to authors' discussion of their results.[@ref497; @ref498]
For example, *The BMJ* recommends that authors structure the discussion
section by presenting (1) a statement of the principal findings; (2) the
strengths and weaknesses of the study; (3) the strengths and weaknesses
in relation to other studies, discussing important differences in
results; (4) the meaning of the study, its possible explanations and
implications for clinicians and policymakers; and (5) any unanswered
questions and future research.[@ref499] We recommend that authors follow
these sensible suggestions, perhaps also using suitable subheadings in
the discussion section.

Authors should also discuss any imprecision of the results. Imprecision
may arise in connection with several aspects of a study, including
measurement of a primary outcome (item 14) or diagnosis (item 12a).
Perhaps the scale used was validated on an adult population but used in
a paediatric one, or the assessor was not trained in how to administer
the instrument.

The difference between statistical significance and clinical importance
should always be borne in mind. Authors should particularly avoid the
common error of interpreting a non-significant result as indicating
equivalence of interventions. The CI (item 26) provides valuable insight
into whether the trial result is compatible with a clinically important
effect, regardless of the P value.[@ref500]

Authors should exercise special care when evaluating the results of
trials with multiple comparisons. Such multiplicity arises from several
interventions, outcome measures, time points, subgroup analyses, and
other factors. In such circumstances, some statistically significant
findings are likely to result from chance alone.

Authors should also consider the extent to which the results of a study
can be generalised to other circumstances; also known as external
validity. For example, can the results be generalised to an individual
participant or groups that differ from those enrolled in the trial with
regard to age, sex, severity of disease, and comorbid conditions? Are
the results applicable to other drugs within a class of similar drugs,
to a different dose, timing, and route of administration? Can similar
results be expected in different healthcare settings? What about the
effect on related outcomes that were not assessed in the trial, and the
importance of length of follow-up and duration of treatment, especially
with respect to harms?[@ref501] Internal validity, the extent to which
the design and conduct of the trial eliminates the possibility of bias,
is a prerequisite for external validity: the results of a flawed trial
are invalid and the question of its external validity becomes
irrelevant. External validity is a matter of judgement and depends on
the characteristics of the participants included in the trial, the trial
setting, the treatment regimens tested, and the outcomes assessed.