---
id: protocol-and-statistical-analysis-plan
title: 3. Protocol and statistical analysis plan
summary:
    text: Where the trial protocol and statistical analysis plan can be accessed.
    title: Protocol and statistical analysis plan
---

## What to write

Where the trial protocol and statistical analysis plan can be accessed

## Example

"The full trial protocol and the Statistical Analysis Plan can be
accessed in the Supplementary Material".[@ref74] This article and
supplementary material are open access.

## Explanation

A protocol for the complete trial (rather than a protocol of a specific
procedure within a trial, such as for the intervention) is important
because it prespecifies the methods of the randomised trial, for
example, the primary outcome (item 14). Having a protocol provides
important context to interpret a trial, implement its findings, and
facilitate replication and appraisal of risk of bias. It can also help
to restrict the likelihood of undeclared post hoc changes to the trial
methods and selective outcome reporting (item 10).[@ref75; @ref76]
[@ref77] Elements that are important to address in the protocol for a
randomised trial are described in the SPIRIT 2025 statement.[@ref78]

A protocol may either include the full statistical analysis plan or may
include a section outlining the main principles while referencing and
reporting the full statistical analysis plan as a separate, more
detailed document. The statistical analysis plan typically includes
details about several aspects of the clinical trial, such as the data
analysis plan for the primary outcome(s) and all secondary outcomes.
Details about what to include in a statistical analysis plan can be
found elsewhere.[@ref79]

The protocol should be signed off by the trial steering committee before
the allocation of any participants and data collection. Similarly, the
full statistical analysis plan should be signed off by the trial
steering committee before the dataset is closed for analysis. This
allows transparent documentation of any subsequent changes to either
document. In many trials, changes to the protocol and statistical
analysis plan may happen after the trial onset for legitimate reasons
(eg, in response to challenges that were not anticipated or new
evidence). In these cases, each iteration of the protocol and
statistical analysis plan should record the changes along with their
rationale and timing.

There are several options for authors to consider to ensure their trial
protocol, and full statistical analysis plan where applicable, are
accessible to interested readers. The protocol and full statistical
analysis plan (and their various iterations) can be stored in a
repository, such as the Open Science Framework, which is free to use and
access for all readers. Openness and accessibility are core elements of
open science (see Open science section). Trial protocols and statistical
analysis plans can also be published in journals such as *Trials* and
*BMJ Open*. Open access publication would ensure that any reader,
including patients and the public, can access the document. Trial
registration (item 2) will also ensure that a minimum set of trial
protocol details are available as part of the trial's registration
(<https://www.who.int/clinical-trials-registry-platform>), but often a
registration record leaves large ambiguity about key protocol issues and
statistical analyses. The more detailed trial protocol can also be
posted on most clinical trial registries.

Ideally, the authors should give access to the protocol signed off by
the trial steering committee before the allocation of any participants
and data collection with any subsequent changes with their rationale and
timing.

When submitting a completed trial report, trial authors can include
their protocol as a supplemental document or provide a URL to its
location. Such documentation can facilitate peer review and help
identify reporting biases.
