---
id: data-sharing
title: 4. Data sharing
summary:
    text: Where and how the individual de-identified participant data (including data dictionary), statistical code and any other materials can be accessed.
---

## What to write

Where and how the individual de-identified participant data (including data dictionary), statistical code, and any other materials can be accessed

## Examples

"All data requests should be submitted to the corresponding author (AR)
for consideration as agreed in our publication plan. Access to
anonymised data may be granted following review with the Trial
Management Group and agreement of the chief investigator (AR)."[@ref80]

"Deidentified data collected and presented in this study, including
individual participant data and a data dictionary defining each field in
the set, will be made available upon reasonable request after
publication of this Article, following approval by regulatory
authorities. Data can be requested by contacting the corresponding
author."[@ref81]

## Explanation

Data and code sharing can take the transparency of trial reporting to a
different, more desirable level. Sharing individual de-identified
participant data would be helpful in many ways: verifying results and
increasing trust; using data more extensively for secondary analyses;
and using data for individual patient data meta-analysis (IPD MA). Data
sharing is also associated with increased citations[@ref82] (ie, broader
dissemination). Some trial groups have worked collaboratively to conduct
IPD MA.[@ref83] However, for most randomised trials, data sharing does
not happen.[@ref84; @ref85; @ref86; @ref87; @ref88] During the
covid-19 pandemic, there were many examples of authors' intentions to
share data that then did not transpire (ie, they did not share their
data).[@ref87; @ref89] There is increasing concern that some trials are
fraudulent or considered to be so-called zombie trials, which becomes
evident only on inspection of the raw data.[@ref90; @ref91] However,
even if zombie trials are not as prevalent as feared, genuine trials can
have such an important role and high value that it is important to
maximise their utility by making them more open. Detailed documentation
of sharing plans may help in this direction.[@ref92]

All data sharing should abide by the principle of being as open as
possible and as closed as necessary throughout a randomised trial's life
cycle (from SPIRIT to CONSORT). It is important to ensure that all the
appropriate permissions are included on the patient consent forms.
Trials cannot share data that are not fully anonymised without the
appropriate patient consent, and full anonymisation can be difficult.
Care must be taken to share participant data appropriately to maintain
confidentiality. Suitable mechanisms must be in place to appropriately
de-identify participant data, and data should only be shared in a safe
and secure manner that fits with the consent obtained from participants.

Data sharing typically involves sharing: the underlying data generated
from the trial's conduct; a data dictionary (ie, structure, content, and
meaning of each data variable); and other relevant material(s) used as
part of the trial's analysis such as the trial protocol, data management
plan, statistical analysis plan, and code used to analyse the data. A
trial's data can be shared in a variety of ways, such as via an
institutional repository (eg, belonging to the university associated
with the trial's coordinating centre) and/or a public-facing repository,
or by having a bespoke process to provide data. Often, a data use
agreement is necessary, which will, at a minimum: prohibit attempts to
reidentify or contact trial participants; address any requirements
regarding planned outputs of the proposed research (eg, publication and
acknowledgment requirements); and prohibit non-approved uses or further
distribution of the data.[@ref93]

In a growing number of jurisdictions, funders such as the National
Institute for Health (NIH),[@ref94] in the US and the National Institute
for Health and Care Research (NIHR) in the UK, alongside other funders
such as the Gate's Foundation, now require researchers to share their
data and make the results publicly available for anyone to read.
Similarly, some journals are also requiring authors to include a data
sharing statement as part of the article submission process (eg, *Annals
of Internal Medicine*, *The BMJ*, *JAMA Network* journals, *PLoS
Medicine*).

The process of signalling how data sharing will be achieved is often
contained in a data management plan but may also be found in the trial
protocol or statistical analysis plan. More complete details regarding
developing a data management plan are beyond the scope of this paper.
Such details can be found elsewhere.[@ref95] Authors should provide some
description of where these details can be found (eg, name of repository
and URL to data, code, and materials). Sharing may also entail embargo
periods, and if so, the choice of an embargo should be justified and its
length should be stated.[@ref96] If data (or some parts thereof) cannot
be shared, the reasons for this should be reported and should be
sensible and following ethical principles.

For more complex trials (eg, types of talking therapies, physiotherapy),
additional materials to share might include a handbook and/or video to
detail the intervention.[@ref93] Often these can be shared much more
freely than the data, as there are fewer issues with confidentiality.

