---
id: funding
title: 5a. Funding
summary:
    title: 5a. Funding
    text: Sources of funding and other support (eg, supply of drugs), and role of funders in the design, conduct, analysis, and reporting of the trial.
---

## What to write

Sources of funding and other support (eg, supply of drugs), and role of funders in the design, conduct, analysis, and reporting of the trial

## Examples

"Grant support was received for the intervention from Plan International
and for the research from the Wellcome Trust and Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript."[@ref97]

"Funding: Merck Sharp and Dohme . . . The study funder had a role in the
study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, and
writing of the report."[@ref98]

The article also states that "Merck employees LY, SB, and PB were
involved in the conceptualisation of the study, formal analysis, the
investigation process, development of the methodology, project
administration, drafting the manuscript, and had critically reviewed and
edited the manuscript."[@ref98]

## Explanation

Reporting the funding source(s), and the exact roles of the trial
funders, provides important context for readers of a trial report when
ascertaining overall methodological rigor (eg, relevance of the type of
comparator intervention and eligibility criteria for patients) and risk
of bias (eg, selective reporting of favourable results). The trial
report should therefore describe details of all funders and the types of
funding, as well as the role of the funder in trial design (ie, protocol
development), conduct, data analysis, and reporting (ie, interpretation,
manuscript writing, and dissemination of results). This should include
whether the funder controlled the final decision regarding any of these
aspects of the trial, and any mechanisms introduced to minimise funder
influence. If the funder had no direct involvement in the trial, that
should be stated.

A randomised trial requires considerable funding, typically from
pharmaceutical or device companies (industry funding); or from research
councils or other scientific or private foundations, or governmental or
non-governmental organisations (non-industry funding).[@ref99] One study
of trials conducted between 2010 and 2015 estimated the median cost per
phase 3 drug company trial at \$21.4m (£17.21m; €20.7m),[@ref100] with
substantial variation. The mean cost of clinical trials funded by the
NIHR in the UK, reflecting differences in the research and care
infrastructure already funded, was lower, but still
sizeable---approximately £1.3m---with considerable variation.[@ref101]
The various types of funders differ in their overall agenda, their
reasons for funding a trial, and their propensity to influence the
trial.

Funding of a trial typically involves direct monetary support, but
financial support may also be provided indirectly in the form of free
trial drugs, equipment, or services (eg, statistical analysis or use of
medical writers).[@ref102] Among the most highly cited clinical trials
published in 2019 to 2022, two thirds were funded by industry sponsors,
many of whom also provided industry analysts and coauthors.[@ref103]

Industry funding of trials is associated with conclusions that favour
the experimental intervention. A systematic review of 75 methodological
studies, comparing industry funded studies with non-industry funded
studies (mostly randomised trials), reported that industry funded
studies had favourable conclusions more often than non‐industry funded
studies (risk ratio 1.34; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.19 to
1.51).[@ref104] Industry funded trials may also report more favourable
results (ie, larger estimates of intervention effects) than comparable
trials that are funded by non-industry sources. One review of eight
published meta-epidemiological studies reported that intervention
effects (odds ratios) from industry funded trials were, on average,
exaggerated by 5% (95% CI −6% to 15%), although the result was imprecise
and consistent with chance findings. However, trials with a high risk of
industry funder influence (eg, on trial design, conduct, analysis, and
reporting) exaggerated effect estimates by 12% (95% CI 3% to
19%).[@ref105] Undue influence on trials from non-industry funders with
a strong interest in a specific trial result has been
described,[@ref106] but has been studied much less.

A review of 200 trials published in 2015[@ref107] found that 178 (89%)
publications included a funding statement. However, in half of the
publications, the role of funder was not reported; in the other half,
the reporting was often unclear or incomplete; and undisclosed funding
from a for-profit organisation was found in 26 of 54 trials reporting
only not-for-profit funding. Another study surveyed authors of 200
trials fully funded by industry and found that funders had been involved
in the design of 173 trials (87%), in the data analysis of 146 trials
(73%), and in the reporting of 173 trials (87%).[@ref102] No clear
consensus exists on a monetary threshold for when funding from a source
with conflict of interest becomes problematic. It is also unclear
whether commercial funding is less important than the degree and type of
funder influence on trial design, conduct, analysis, and reporting.
