---
id: conflicts-of-interest
title: 5b. Conflicts of interest 
summary:
    title: 5b. Conflicts of interest
    text: Financial and other conflicts of interest of the manuscript authors.
---

## What to write

Financial and other conflicts of interest of the manuscript authors

## Example

"SYR reports grants from Amgen, Astellas, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai, Merck,
Roche, Zymeworks, Indivumed, MSD, Ono/Bristol Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca,
BI, Taiho, Lilly, SN Bioscience. SRF has received honoraria as an
invited speaker for Lilly, Eisai, Daiichi Sankyo, MSD, and Ono/Bristol
Myers Squibb; has participated on advisory boards for Amgen and
Indivumed; and has served as an advisor for Astellas, Daiichi Sankyo,
Eisai, LG Biochem, Merck Sharpe Dohme, Ono/Bristol Myers Squibb, and
AstraZeneca. D-YO reports grants from AstraZeneca, Novartis, Array, Eli
Lilly, Servier, BeiGene, Merck Sharpe Dohme, and Handok; and has
participated on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board for
AstraZeneca, Novartis, Genentech/Roche, Merck Serono, Bayer, Taiho,
ASLAN, Halozyme, Zymeworks, Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, BeiGene,
Basilea, Turning Point, Yuhan, Arcus Biosciences, IQVIA, and Merck
Sharpe Dohme. M-HR reports research grants from AstraZeneca; consulting
fees from Bristol Myers Squibb, Ono, Lilly, Merck Sharpe Dohme,
Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, and Astellas; and has
received honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, or
educational events from Bristol Myers Squibb, Ono, Lilly, Merck Sharpe
Dohme, Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, and Astellas . . .

"LY, SB and PB report full-time employment by Merck Sharp and Dohme, a
subsidiary of Merck (Rahway, NJ, USA), and stock ownership in Merck. LSW
reports consulting fees from Amgen; and has received honoraria for
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, or educational events from
Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Sharpe Dohme, Roche, and Amgen.

"PY, YB, JLee, MGF, JLi, MAL, TC, SQ, SL, and HP declare no competing
interests."[@ref98]

## Explanation

Disclosure of authors' conflicts of interest provides important context
for readers of a trial report when ascertaining the overall
methodological rigor of a trial (eg, relevance of the type of comparator
intervention and eligibility criteria for patients) and risk of bias
(eg, selective reporting of favourable results). Conflicts of interest
of all trial manuscript authors should be reported, along with any
procedures to reduce the risk of conflicts of interest influencing the
trial's design, conduct, analysis, or reporting.

Conflicts of interest can be defined as "a set of circumstances that
creates a risk that professional judgement or actions regarding a
primary interest will be unduly influenced by a secondary
interest."[@ref108] In the context of authors of a trial report,
conflicts of interest imply a risk that investigators' personal
interests and allegiances, or ties with companies or organisations, have
undue influence on the design, conduct, analysis, or reporting of a
trial. The concept implies a risk of influence and is not indicative of
actual wrongdoing.

Conflicts of interest are most often associated with the drug and device
industries. Types of financial ties include salary support or grants;
ownership of stock or options; honorariums (eg, for advice, authorship,
or public speaking); paid consultancy or service on advisory boards and
medical education companies; and receipt of patents or patents pending.
An analysis of 200 trials from 2015 reported that 57% of trials had at
least one author declaring financial conflicts of interests.[@ref109]

Conflicts of interest may also exist with support from or affiliation
with government agencies, charities, and professional and civic
organisations. Non-financial conflicts of interest include academic
commitments; personal or professional relationships; and political,
religious, or other affiliations with special interests or advocacy
positions. An analysis of 200 trials found that 4% of trials had at
least one author declaring non-financial conflicts of interest.[@ref109]
There is ongoing discussion on the association between a problematic
non-financial conflict of interest and a reasonable point of
view.[@ref110]

A cross sectional study of 190 randomised trials, published in core
clinical journals, found that trials with authors' conflicts of interest
had more positive results than trials without. The presence of a
financial tie was associated with a positive study outcome (odds ratio
3.23; 95% CI 1.7 to 6.1). This association was also present after
adjustment for the study funding source (odds ratio 3.57; 95% CI 1.7 to
7.7).[@ref111]

Although financial conflicts of interest are often declared in
trials,[@ref109] the declarations are generally imprecise, and
undisclosed conflicts are common.[@ref112] A systematic review of
studies comparing financial conflicts of interest declared in medical
publications or guidelines (not only randomised trials) with
declarations in payment databases (eg, the Open Payments Database) found
that the median percentage of authors with "non-concordant" disclosures
was 81%.[@ref112] A study including only randomised trials found that 35
(30%) of 115 authors from non-industry funded trials had undisclosed
conflicts of interest whereas that was the case for 102 (50%) of 203
authors from industry funded trials.[@ref113] For financial conflicts
that cannot be tracked to public databases and for non-financial
conflicts, the rate of non-disclosure is unknown but it is likely to be
even higher.
