---
id: background-and-rationale
title: 6. Background and rationale
summary:
    text: Scientific background and rationale.
---

## What to write

Scientific background and rationale

## Example

"Most problems with shoulder pain are managed in primary care by
physiotherapists and GPs \[general practitioners\] . . . Evidence from
small, short-term trials suggests that physiotherapist-prescribed
exercise is promising. However, a Cochrane review highlighted the
insufficient evidence about the treatment\'s long-term clinical
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. Despite widespread provision,
uncertainty exists about which types of exercise and levels of
physiotherapy supervision are associated with the best outcomes. This
evidence is limited by problems in study design and lack of comparator
groups. Progressive resistance training to improve muscular strength,
whether supervised or home based, has been identified as a core
component of exercise for patients with rotator cuff disorders.
Subacromial corticosteroid injections are commonly used to reduce local
tissue inflammation and pain. Compared with placebo, corticosteroid
injections have short-term benefit in the shoulder, although the
longer-term benefits and harms are not known. Corticosteroid injections
are being used increasingly in clinical practice alongside physiotherapy
for the management of people with rotator cuff disorders; hence
justification for investigating corticosteroid injection in the GRASP
(Getting it Right: Addressing Shoulder Pain) trial alongside
physiotherapist-prescribed exercise."[@ref114]

## Explanation

Typically, the introduction of the trial report consists of free-flowing
text, in which authors explain the scientific background and rationale
for their trial, and its general outline. The rationale may be
explanatory (eg, to assess the possible influence of a drug on renal
function under tightly regulated conditions) or pragmatic (eg, to guide
practice by comparing the benefits and harms of two treatments in a
clinical setting). Authors should report any evidence of the benefits
and harms of active interventions included in a trial and should suggest
a plausible explanation for how the interventions might work, if this is
not obvious. Understanding the rationale or theory underpinning an
intervention helps readers to understand which aspects or components are
likely to be essential to its efficacy.[@ref23] In addition, authors
should justify the choice of comparator(s).[@ref115; @ref116] The
choice of the comparator (active or placebo) will influence effect
estimates. It could raise ethical concerns if patients could be
allocated to a placebo or to a suboptimal treatment while an active
treatment has been proven effective. Authors should justify the need for
the trial they conducted and show that there was equipoise about the
best treatment for the condition in the population being studied.

The Declaration of Helsinki states that biomedical research involving
people should be based on a thorough knowledge of the scientific
literature.[@ref117] It is unethical to expose humans unnecessarily to
the risks of research. Some clinical trials have been shown to have been
unnecessary because the question they addressed had been, or could have
been, answered by a systematic review of the existing
literature.[@ref118; @ref119; @ref120] Thus, the need for a new trial
should be justified in the introduction. Ideally, this justification
should include a reference to one or more systematic reviews of previous
trials. In the absence of a published systematic review, authors should
report and summarise the results of previous relevant trials or note
their absence.[@ref121] The percentage of published trial reports that
cite a systematic review of pre-existing evidence where one is available
has increased over time, but over a quarter still fail to do
so.[@ref122]

