---
id: objectives
title: 7. Objectives
summary:
    text: Specific objectives related to benefits and harms.
---

## What to write

Specific objectives related to benefits and harms

## Example

"To evaluate whether a structured exercise programme improved functional
and health related quality of life outcomes compared with usual care for
women at high risk of upper limb disability after breast cancer
surgery."[@ref123]

## Explanation

Objectives are the questions that the trial was designed to answer.
Adequate reporting of the research question is essential to allow
readers to appraise and interpret the trial results. The PICO framework,
which requires defining the patient population (P); the experimental
intervention (I); the comparator intervention or condition (C); and the
outcome or outcomes (O) of interest, has been proposed to help define
the research question. PICO is sometimes styled as PICOTS, to include T
(the timeframe) and/or S (the setting).[@ref124]

Treatment decisions require an evaluation of the balance between benefit
and harm; however, information about harms is frequently omitted or
incompletely reported in published reports of trial results.[@ref125]
[@ref126; @ref127; @ref128] Trials whose primary objective is to
evaluate benefits of an intervention may not be powered to detect harms,
but authors should still report whether they considered harms outcomes
when planning the trial.[@ref20]

Authors should clarify whether the aim is to establish superiority of
the experimental intervention, or non-inferiority or equivalence, as
compared with the comparator intervention.[@ref129] Authors should also
report whether the trial is intended to provide preliminary data (a
pilot or feasibility trial),[@ref130] explore pharmacokinetic
properties, or generate confirmatory results.

For multi-arm trials, authors should clarify which treatment group
comparisons are of interest (eg, A *v* B; A *v* C). If authors planned
to readjust the objective during the trial (eg, in some platform trials
or basket trials[@ref131]), this should be reported. Finally, trials can
be designed to study the effect of the experimental intervention under
different conditions, often described on a spectrum from ideal
conditions (explanatory trial) to standard clinical care conditions
(pragmatic trial).[@ref132]

The objectives should be phrased using neutral wording (eg, "to compare
the effect of treatment A versus treatment B on outcome X for persons
with condition Y") rather than in terms of a particular direction of
effect.[@ref133] The trial objectives should align with what was
specified in the trial registry and protocol; any changes to the trial
objectives after it commenced should be reported with reasons (item 10).

Recently, some trials have been designed using the estimands framework
to define the research question and trial objectives. While the
terminology surrounding estimands may be new to some investigators, it
is expected that the use of this framework will become more widespread.
[Box 1](#box1){ref-type="boxed-text"} provides more information about
the estimands framework and how it is being used.

::: caption
###### Estimands
:::

Concerns have been raised that the precise research questions that
randomised trials set out to answer are often unclear.[@ref134] In
particular, there is often ambiguity around how events occurring after
randomisation (termed intercurrent events) are handled. Specifying the
research question using an estimands framework is increasingly used to
improve clarity. Despite calls for estimands to be included in the
CONSORT 2025 statement,[@ref134; @ref135] their inclusion did not reach
consensus. However, we provide a brief overview of estimands and
introduce terminology, so they can be applied and reported if used. A
more detailed primer on the estimand framework which provides practical
guidance on estimands in studies of healthcare interventions can be
found elsewhere.[@ref135]

ICH E9(R1) defines an estimand as "a precise description of the
treatment effect reflecting the clinical question posed by a given
clinical trial objective."[@ref136] The estimands framework provides a
structured description of the objectives in an attempt to bring clarity
in specifying the research question, which can be used to guide the
study design, data collection, and statistical analysis methods. In
brief, an estimand comprises five key attributes: population, treatment
groups, endpoint, summary measure, and handling of intercurrent events
([table 3](#tbl3){ref-type="table"}). A separate estimand should be
defined for each study outcome, and for some outcomes, more than one
estimand may be defined.

:::: {#tbl3 .table-wrap}
::: caption
Five key attributes of the estimand framework[@ref135]
:::

  Attribute                         Definition
  --------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                        Patients for whom researchers want to estimate the treatment effect
  Treatment groups                  Different intervention strategies being compared in the treatment effect definition
  Endpoint                          Outcome for each participant that is used in the treatment effect definition
  Summary measure                   Method used to summarise and compare the endpoint between treatment conditions (eg, risk ratio, odds ratio)
  Handling of intercurrent events   Strategies used to handle each intercurrent event\* in the treatment effect definition; different strategies could be used for different types of intercurrent events

Intercurrent events are post-baseline events (or post-randomisation
events in randomised trials) that affect the interpretation or existence
of outcome data. These events frequently affect receipt of treatment
(eg, treatment switching or treatment discontinuation) or preclude
existence of the outcome (eg, death, if it is not defined as part of the
outcome).
::::

The ICH E9(R1) outlines five strategies for handling intercurrent
events, which are at the core of the estimand framework ([table
4](#tbl4){ref-type="table"}).

:::: {#tbl4 .table-wrap}
::: caption
Strategies for handling intercurrent events
:::

  Strategy             Description
  -------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Treatment policy     The occurrence of the intercurrent event is considered irrelevant in defining the treatment effect of interest: the value for the outcome of interest is used regardless of whether the intercurrent event occurs
  Hypothetical         The treatment effect in a scenario where the intercurrent event did not occur is of interest
  Composite            The intercurrent event is incorporated into the outcome definition
  While on treatment   The outcome before the occurrence of the intercurrent event is of interest
  Principal stratum    The outcome in a subpopulation of patients who would not (or would) experience the intercurrent event is of interest.
::::

Although the terminology surrounding estimands may be new to some
investigators, it is expected that defining research questions using the
estimands framework will become more widespread. A number of existing
reporting guidelines have recently included estimands with the reporting
recommendations.[@ref137; @ref138; @ref139] If the estimands framework
has been used to design the trial or the data collection or to inform
the statistical analysis (by guiding choice of appropriate methods),
then this should be made clear in the manuscript and the methods and
results should be reported within the framework.