---
id: patient-and-public-involvement 
title: 8. Patient and public involvement 
summary:
    text: Details of patient or public involvement in the design, conduct and reporting of the trial.
---

## What to write

Details of patient or public involvement in the design, conduct, and reporting of the trial

## Examples

"A study patient advisory group advised on study design before funding,
in study set-up, and during recruitment. They chose the term best
current treatment and informed the design of clinic procedures
(including how best to reduce the burden of intervention), questionnaire
design, and participant information. This group informed protocol
modifications in response to low recruitment, and guided interpretation
of the findings. Two public contributors were members of the independent
trial steering committee."[@ref140]

"The UK Musculoskeletal Trauma Patient and Public Involvement (PPI)
Group co-designed this study. In particular, the group advised on the
choice of outcome measures and the follow-up arrangements, which were
designed to limit the number of face-to-face hospital visits needed.
Subsequently, a patient member from this group became a member of the
DRAFFT2 Trial Management Group, overseeing all elements of the set-up
and delivery of the trial and the dissemination of the lay summary at
completion. Another patient member of the group was also a member of the
independent Trial Steering Committee."[@ref141]

"Office workers, workplace champions, and managers within the target
organisation were involved in the study design during the grant
application process and the study delivery phase. During the grant
application phase, the purpose and design of the study as well as the
suggested intervention strategies were presented to two large groups of
council employees. As a result of these meetings, the study design
included using finger prick blood testing rather than taking venous
blood samples, participants receiving feedback on health measures, and
incentives for attending follow-up. During the study set-up and
delivery, a council employee advisory group met several times and
provided advice on delivery of the interventions (feedback showed that
workplace champions would not be comfortable delivering the initial
education session because of the training and planning time required, so
this session was delivered online instead), recruitment processes
(feedback was provided on participant documents and recruitment messages
and strategies within the council), installation of the height
adjustable desk, and troubleshooting. Two council employees were also
part of the trial steering committee, which met twice a year during the
study".[@ref142]

"In the context of the pandemic and the need to design the study in a
short period, no patients were involved in setting the research
questions or the outcome measures, nor were they involved in developing
plans for recruitment, design, or implementation of the study. No
patients were asked to advise on interpretation or writing up of
results."[@ref143]

## Explanation

Patient and public involvement (PPI) has been shown to be particularly
beneficial in clinical trials.[@ref144] It can help researchers to
identify and prioritise research topics and questions; identify relevant
outcome measures; boost recruitment and retention; improve trial design
and tools; and improve the acceptability of trials.[@ref144; @ref145]
PPI can also improve the communication and dissemination of the trial
results to participants. Public involvement in other types of health
research has been shown to help researchers to engage under-served
populations and recruit diverse participant groups.[@ref144] Thus,
transparent reporting of PPI is essential to allow readers to appraise
the relevance and usefulness of findings to end users and to fully
evaluate and understand a trial's methodology and conduct. If patients
and the public were not involved, authors should report this with the
reasons why.

PPI in health research entails collaborating or partnering with patients
and members of the public to design, conduct, report, interpret, or
disseminate research: the research is done by or with patients and the
public---rather than done for, at, or about them.[@ref146; @ref147]
[@ref148] Importantly, this is distinct from including patients or
members of the public in a trial as participants. PPI contributors can
be people with current or past experience of a health condition; their
families, carers, and advocates; members of communities who are target
users of an intervention or service; or members of the wider public with
a broader perspective. The terminology used differs internationally: for
example, such activity is most commonly known as "patient and public
involvement" in the UK, whereas "patient engagement" is more common in
mainland Europe and North America, [@ref147; @ref148], "community and
public engagement" is commonly used in part of Africa, and "consumer
involvement" is frequently used in Australia.[@ref149]

The GRIPP (Guidance for Reporting Involvement of Patients and Public)
checklist was developed in 2011 with the aim of improving the reporting
of PPI activities in health research[@ref150]; followed in 2017 by
GRIPP2.[@ref151] The GRIPP2 checklist includes GRIPP2-SF, which is a
short form of the GRIPP2 checklist where PPI is the secondary focus of
the research.[@ref151] Examples of reporting of PPI involvement could
include whether and how patients were involved in the trial objectives,
whether patients advised on optimising patient recruitment and
retention, and whether and how patients were included in selection of
the trial outcomes.

Funding bodies are increasingly encouraging or requiring researchers to
include PPI in grant applications,[@ref146; @ref152; @ref153] but
mandating of PPI reporting by journals has remained uncommon. In 2014,
*The BMJ* introduced a requirement for submitted manuscripts to include
a PPI statement,[@ref154] and this was extended to other BMJ journals
from 2018.[@ref155; @ref156] A 2023 study of trials addressing chronic
conditions found that approximately 80% of trial reports published in
these journals included a PPI subsection, and around 40% of these
reported that PPI activities had been conducted.[@ref157] Few other
journals have followed suit in mandating reporting of PPI
activities.[@ref158; @ref159; @ref160] In the absence of an explicit
requirement, reporting of PPI activities remains infrequent, appearing
in an estimated 0-5% of published trial reports.[@ref161; @ref162]
[@ref163] There is limited evidence to indicate the extent to which this
reflects a lack of PPI activity versus PPI activity being conducted but
not reported. In a small survey of authors of trials published in high
impact factor journals, only one of 29 respondents reported PPI
activities having been included but not mentioned in the published
article[@ref163]; while in a survey of authors of pragmatic trials, 47%
reported including PPI activities during a trial but less than a quarter
of these reported the activity in the corresponding
publication.[@ref164]
