---
id: trial-design
title: 9. Trial Design
summary:
    text: Description of trial design including type of trial (eg, parallel group, crossover), allocation ratio, and framework (eg, superiority, equivalence, non-inferiority, exploratory).
---

## What to write

Description of trial design including type of trial (eg, parallel group, crossover), allocation ratio, and framework (eg, superiority, equivalence, non-inferiority, exploratory)

## Examples

"This was a multicenter, stratified (6 to 11 years and 12 to 17 years of
age), with imbalanced randomization \[2:1\], double-blind,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group study conducted in the United States
(41 sites)."[@ref165]

"This multicentre, pragmatic, superiority randomised trial compared
three parallel groups for patients referred to secondary care for
treatment of primary frozen shoulder, who were recruited from 35
hospital sites in the UK. Individual participants were randomly assigned
with unequal allocation (2:2:1) to arthroscopic capsular release,
manipulation under anaesthesia, or early structured physiotherapy, to
allow for different effect sizes between groups."[@ref80]

## Explanation

The word "design" is often used to refer to all aspects of how a trial
is set up, but it also has a narrower interpretation. Many aspects of
the broader trial design, including details of randomisation and
blinding, are addressed elsewhere in the CONSORT checklist. This item
refers to the type of trial (eg, parallel group or crossover) and the
conceptual framework (eg, superiority, equivalence, or non-inferiority).

CONSORT 2025 focuses mainly on trials with participants individually
randomised to one of two parallel groups. While many published trials
have such a design, the main alternative designs are multi-arm
parallel,[@ref166] crossover,[@ref167] cluster,[@ref168] and factorial
designs,[@ref138] with each having their own specific CONSORT
extensions. A detailed review of randomised trials published in PubMed
in 2012 showed that of the 1122 trials, 953 (85%) were parallel group;
the other main designs were crossover (n=98; 13%) and cluster (n=31;
3%). Of these 1122 trials, 892 (80%) had two groups, 146 (13%) had three
groups, and 61 (5%) had four or more groups.[@ref169]

Most trials are designed to identify the superiority of a new
intervention, if it exists, but others are designed to assess
non-inferiority or equivalence.[@ref129] It is important that
researchers clearly describe the design of their trial, including the
unit of randomisation (eg, patient, general practice, lesion). These
details should also be included in the abstract (item 1b).

If a less common design is used, authors should explain their choice,
especially as such designs may imply the need for a larger sample size
or more complex analysis and interpretation. Although most trials use
equal randomisation (eg, 1:1 for two groups), it is also helpful to
provide the allocation ratio explicitly.
