---
id: title
title: "1. Title"
checklist:
    text: |
        Indicate that the manuscript concerns an initiative to improve healthcare (broadly defined to include the quality, safety, effectiveness, patient-centredness, timeliness, cost, efficiency and equity of healthcare).
---

## What to write

Indicate that the manuscript concerns an initiative to improve
healthcare (broadly defined to include the quality, safety,
effectiveness, patient-centredness, timeliness, cost, efficiency, and
equity of healthcare, or access to it).

## Explanation

The title of a healthcare improvement report should indicate that it is
about an initiative to improve safety, value and/or quality in
healthcare, and should describe the aim of the project and the context
in which it occurred. Because the title of a paper provides the first
introduction of the work, it should be both descriptive and simply
written to invite the reader to learn more about the project. Both
examples given above do this well.

Authors should consider using terms which allow the reader to identify
easily that the project is within the field of healthcare improvement,
and/or state this explicitly as in the examples below. This information
also facilitates the correct assignment of medical subject headings
(MeSH) in the National Library of Medicine's Medline database. In 2015,
healthcare improvement-related MeSH terms include: Health Care Quality
Access and Evaluation; Quality Assurance; Quality Improvement; Outcome
and Process Assessment (Healthcare); Quality Indicators, Health Care;
Total Quality Management; Safety Management
(<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/MBrowser.html>). Sample keywords which
might be used in connection with improvement work include Quality,
Safety, Evidence, Efficacy, Effectiveness, Theory, Interventions,
Improvement, Outcomes, Processes and Value.

## Examples

### Example 1

> Reducing post-caesarean surgical wound infection rate: an improvement
> project in a Norwegian maternity clinic.[@R15]

### Example 2

> Large scale organizational intervention to improve patient safety in
> four UK hospitals: mixed method evaluation.[@R16]
