---
id: 15_
title: "15. Outcome data"
---
Cohort study Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures over time.Give information separately for exposed and unexposed groups if applicable. Report  outcomes (phenotypes) for each genotype category over time
Case-control study – Report numbers in each exposure category, or summary measures of exposure.Give information separately for cases and controls .  Report numbers in each genotype category. Cross-sectional study – Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures. Give information separately for exposed and unexposed groups if applicable. Report outcomes (phenotypes) for each genotype category

## Read More

Before addressing the possible association between exposures (risk factors) and outcomes, authors should report relevant descriptive data. It may be possible and meaningful to present measures of association in the same table that presents the descriptive data (see item 14a). In a cohort study with events as outcomes, report the numbers of events for each outcome of interest. Consider reporting the event rate per person-year of follow-up. If the risk of an event changes over follow-up time, present the numbers and rates of events in appropriate intervals of follow-up or as a Kaplan-Meier life table or plot. It might be preferable to show plots as cumulative incidence that go up from 0% rather than down from 100%, especially if the event rate is lower than, say, 30% [153]. Consider presenting such information separately for participants in different exposure categories of interest. If a cohort study is investigating other time-related outcomes (e.g., quantitative disease markers such as blood pressure), present appropriate summary measures (e.g., means and standard deviations) over time, perhaps in a table or figure.

For cross-sectional studies, we recommend presenting the same type of information on prevalent outcome events or summary measures. For case-control studies, the focus will be on reporting exposures separately for cases and controls as frequencies or quantitative summaries [154]. For all designs, it may be helpful also to tabulate continuous outcomes or exposures in categories, even if the data are not analysed as such