---
id: 19_
title: "19. Limitations"
---
Discuss limitations of the study, taking into account sources of potential bias or imprecision. Discuss both direction and magnitude of any potential bias.

## Read More

The identification and discussion of the limitations of a study are an essential part of scientific reporting. It is important not only to identify the sources of bias and confounding that could have affected results, but also to discuss the relative importance of different biases, including the likely direction and magnitude of any potential bias (see also item 9 and Box 3).

Authors should also discuss any imprecision of the results. Imprecision may arise in connection with several aspects of a study, including the study size (item 10) and the measurement of exposures, confounders and outcomes (item 8). The inability to precisely measure true values of an exposure tends to result in bias towards unity: the less precisely a risk factor is measured, the greater the bias. This effect has been described as ‘attenuation' [201,202], or more recently as ‘regression dilution bias' [203]. However, when correlated risk factors are measured with different degrees of imprecision, the adjusted relative risk associated with them can be biased towards or away from unity [204–206].

When discussing limitations, authors may compare the study being presented with other studies in the literature in terms of validity, generalisability and precision. In this approach, each study can be viewed as contribution to the literature, not as a stand-alone basis for inference and action [207]. Surprisingly, the discussion of important limitations of a study is sometimes omitted from published reports. A survey of authors who had published original research articles in The Lancet found that important weaknesses of the study were reported by the investigators in the survey questionnaires, but not in the published article