---
id: 6b_
title: "6b. Eligibility criteria"
---
Cohort study – For matched studies, give matching criteria and number of exposed and unexposed.
Case-control study – For matched studies, give matching criteria and the number of controls per case.


## Read More

Matching is much more common in case-control studies, but occasionally, investigators use matching in cohort studies to make groups comparable at the start of follow-up. Matching in cohort studies makes groups directly comparable for potential confounders and presents fewer intricacies than with case-control studies. For example, it is not necessary to take the matching into account for the estimation of the relative risk [48]. Because matching in cohort studies may increase statistical precision investigators might allow for the matching in their analyses and thus obtain narrower confidence intervals.

In case-control studies matching is done to increase a study's efficiency by ensuring similarity in the distribution of variables between cases and controls, in particular the distribution of potential confounding variables [48,49]. Because matching can be done in various ways, with one or more controls per case, the rationale for the choice of matching variables and the details of the method used should be described. Commonly used forms of matching are frequency matching (also called group matching) and individual matching. In frequency matching, investigators choose controls so that the distribution of matching variables becomes identical or similar to that of cases. Individual matching involves matching one or several controls to each case. Although intuitively appealing and sometimes useful, matching in case-control studies has a number of disadvantages, is not always appropriate, and needs to be taken into account in the analysis