---
id: statistical-methods-analytical-methods-sampling-strategy
title: "12diii. Statistical methods â€“ sampling strategy"
checklist: 
    text: "**Cross-sectional study:** If applicable, describe analytical methods taking account of sampling strategy."
---

## What to write

**Cross-sectional study:** If applicable, describe analytical methods taking account of sampling strategy.

## Explanation

Most cross-sectional studies use a pre-specified sampling strategy to
select participants from a source population. Sampling may be more
complex than taking a simple random sample, however. It may include
several stages and clustering of participants (e.g., in districts or
villages). Proportionate stratification may ensure that subgroups with a
specific characteristic are correctly represented. Disproportionate
stratification may be useful to over-sample a subgroup of particular
interest.

An estimate of association derived from a complex sample may be more or
less precise than that derived from a simple random sample. Measures of
precision such as standard error or confidence interval should be
corrected using the design effect, a ratio measure that describes how
much precision is gained or lost if a more complex sampling strategy is
used instead of simple random sampling [@pmed-0040297-b119]. Most
complex sampling techniques lead to a decrease of precision, resulting
in a design effect greater than 1.

We advise that authors clearly state the method used to adjust for
complex sampling strategies so that readers may understand how the
chosen sampling method influenced the precision of the obtained
estimates. For instance, with clustered sampling, the implicit trade-off
between easier data collection and loss of precision is transparent if
the design effect is reported. In the example, the calculated design
effects of 1.9 for men indicates that the actual sample size would need
to be 1.9 times greater than with simple random sampling for the
resulting estimates to have equal precision.

## Examples

> "The standard errors (SE) were calculated using the Taylor expansion
method to estimate the sampling errors of estimators based on the
complex sample design. (...) The overall design effect for diastolic
blood pressure was found to be 1.9 for men and 1.8 for women and, for
systolic blood pressure, it was 1.9 for men and 2.0 for women"
[@pmed-0040297-b118].