---
id: background-rationale
title: "2. Background / rationale"
checklist: 
    text: Explain the scientific background and rationale for the investigation being reported.
---

## What to write

Explain the scientific background and rationale for the investigation being reported.

## Explanation

The scientific background of the study provides important context for
readers. It sets the stage for the study and describes its focus. It
gives an overview of what is known on a topic and what gaps in current
knowledge are addressed by the study. Background material should note
recent pertinent studies and any systematic reviews of pertinent
studies.

## Example

> "Concerns about the rising prevalence of obesity in children and
adolescents have focused on the well documented associations between
childhood obesity and increased cardiovascular risk and mortality in
adulthood. Childhood obesity has considerable social and psychological
consequences within childhood and adolescence, yet little is known about
social, socioeconomic, and psychological consequences in adult life. A
recent systematic review found no longitudinal studies on the outcomes
of childhood obesity other than physical health outcomes and only two
longitudinal studies of the socioeconomic effects of obesity in
adolescence. Gortmaker et al. found that US women who had been obese in
late adolescence in 1981 were less likely to be married and had lower
incomes seven years later than women who had not been overweight, while
men who had been overweight were less likely to be married. Sargent et
al. found that UK women, but not men, who had been obese at 16 years in
1974 earned 7.4% less than their non-obese peers at age 23. (...) We
used longitudinal data from the 1970 British birth cohort to examine the
adult socioeconomic, educational, social, and psychological outcomes of
childhood obesity" [@pmed-0040297-b026].
