---
id: eligibility-criteria
title: "6a. Eligibility criteria"
checklist: 
    text: >-
        **Cohort study:** Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of selection of participants. Describe methods of follow-up.
        **Case-control study:** Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of case ascertainment and control selection. Give the rationale for the choice of cases and controls.
        **Cross-sectional study:** Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of selection of participants.
---

## What to write

**Cohort study:** Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of selection of participants. Describe methods of follow-up.

**Case-control study:** Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of case ascertainment and control selection. Give the rationale for the choice of cases and controls.

**Cross-sectional study:** Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of selection of participants.

## Explanation

Detailed descriptions of the study participants help readers understand
the applicability of the results. Investigators usually restrict a study
population by defining clinical, demographic and other characteristics
of eligible participants. Typical eligibility criteria relate to age,
gender, diagnosis and comorbid conditions. Despite their importance,
eligibility criteria often are not reported adequately. In a survey of
observational stroke research, 17 of 49 reports (35%) did not specify
eligibility criteria [@pmed-0040297-b005].

Eligibility criteria may be presented as inclusion and exclusion
criteria, although this distinction is not always necessary or useful.
Regardless, we advise authors to report all eligibility criteria and
also to describe the group from which the study population was selected
(e.g., the general population of a region or country), and the method of
recruitment (e.g., referral or self-selection through advertisements).

Knowing details about follow-up procedures, including whether procedures
minimized non-response and loss to follow-up and whether the procedures
were similar for all participants, informs judgments about the validity
of results. For example, in a study that used IgM antibodies to detect
acute infections, readers needed to know the interval between blood
tests for IgM antibodies so that they could judge whether some
infections likely were missed because the interval between blood tests
was too long [@pmed-0040297-b041]. In other studies where follow-up
procedures differed between exposed and unexposed groups, readers might
recognize substantial bias due to unequal ascertainment of events or
differences in non-response or loss to follow-up
[@pmed-0040297-b042]. Accordingly, we advise that researchers
describe the methods used for following participants and whether those
methods were the same for all participants, and that they describe the
completeness of ascertainment of variables (see also [{{< meta items.descriptive-data-missing-data.title >}}]({{< meta items.descriptive-data-missing-data.web_path >}}) and [{{< meta items.descriptive-data-follow-up-time.title >}}]({{< meta items.descriptive-data-follow-up-time.web_path >}})).

In case-control studies, the choice of cases and controls is crucial to
interpreting the results, and the method of their selection has major
implications for study validity. In general, controls should reflect the
population from which the cases arose. Various methods are used to
sample controls, all with advantages and disadvantages: for cases that
arise from a general population, population roster sampling, random
digit dialling, neighbourhood or friend controls are used. Neighbourhood
or friend controls may present intrinsic matching on exposure
[@pmed-0040297-b017]. Controls with other diseases may have
advantages over population-based controls, in particular for
hospital-based cases, because they better reflect the catchment
population of a hospital, have greater comparability of recall and ease
of recruitment. However, they can present problems if the exposure of
interest affects the risk of developing or being hospitalized for the
control condition(s) [@pmed-0040297-b043; @pmed-0040297-b044]. To
remedy this problem often a mixture of the best defensible control
diseases is used [@pmed-0040297-b045].

## Examples

### Cohort study

> "Participants in the Iowa Women's Health Study were a random sample of
all women ages 55 to 69 years derived from the state of Iowa automobile
driver's license list in 1985, which represented approximately 94% of
Iowa women in that age group. (...) Follow-up questionnaires were mailed
in October 1987 and August 1989 to assess vital status and address
changes. (...) Incident cancers, except for nonmelanoma skin cancers,
were ascertained by the State Health Registry of Iowa (...). The Iowa
Women's Health Study cohort was matched to the registry with
combinations of first, last, and maiden names, zip code, birthdate, and
social security number" [@pmed-0040297-b038].

### Case-control study

> "Cutaneous melanoma cases diagnosed in 1999 and 2000 were ascertained
through the Iowa Cancer Registry (...). Controls, also identified
through the Iowa Cancer Registry, were colorectal cancer patients
diagnosed during the same time. Colorectal cancer controls were selected
because they are common and have a relatively long survival, and because
arsenic exposure has not been conclusively linked to the incidence of
colorectal cancer" [@pmed-0040297-b039].

### Cross-sectional study

> "We retrospectively identified patients with a principal diagnosis of
myocardial infarction (code 410) according to the International
Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification, from
codes designating discharge diagnoses, excluding the codes with a fifth
digit of 2, which designates a subsequent episode of care (...) A random
sample of the entire Medicare cohort with myocardial infarction from
February 1994 to July 1995 was selected (...) To be eligible, patients
had to present to the hospital after at least 30 minutes but less than
12 hours of chest pain and had to have ST-segment elevation of at least
1 mm on two contiguous leads on the initial electrocardiogram"
[@pmed-0040297-b040].
