---
id: 10_data_collection_process
title: "10. Data collection process"
---
Describe the method of data extraction from reports (e.g., piloted forms, independently by two reviewers) and any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators.

## Read More

Reviewers extract information from each included study so that they can critique, present, and summarize evidence in a systematic review. They might also contact authors of included studies for information that has not been, or is unclearly, reported. In meta-analysis of individual patient data, this phase involves collection and scrutiny of detailed raw databases. The authors should describe these methods, including any steps taken to reduce bias and mistakes during data collection and data extraction [78] (Box 3).

Some systematic reviewers use a data extraction form that could be reported as an appendix or “Web extra” to their report. These forms could show the reader what information reviewers sought (see Item 11) and how they extracted it. Authors could tell readers if the form was piloted. Regardless, we advise authors to tell readers who extracted what data, whether any extractions were completed in duplicate, and, if so, whether duplicate abstraction was done independently and how disagreements were resolved.

Published reports of the included studies may not provide all the information required for the review. Reviewers should describe any actions they took to seek additional information from the original researchers (see Item 7). The description might include how they attempted to contact researchers, what they asked for, and their success in obtaining the necessary information. Authors should also tell readers when individual patient data were sought from the original researchers [41] (see Item 11) and indicate the studies for which such data were used in the analyses. The reviewers ideally should also state whether they confirmed the accuracy of the information included in their review with the original researchers, for example, by sending them a copy of the draft review [79].

Some studies are published more than once. Duplicate publications may be difficult to ascertain, and their inclusion may introduce bias [80],[81]. We advise authors to describe any steps they used to avoid double counting and piece together data from multiple reports of the same study (e.g., juxtaposing author names, treatment comparisons, sample sizes, or outcomes). We also advise authors to indicate whether all reports on a study were considered, as inconsistencies may reveal important limitations. For example, a review of multiple publications of drug trials showed that reported study characteristics may differ from report to report, including the description of the design, number of patients analyzed, chosen significance level, and outcomes [82]. Authors ideally should present any algorithm that they used to select data from overlapping reports and any efforts they used to solve logical inconsistencies across reports

## Examples

> We developed a data extraction sheet (based on the Cochrane Consumers and Communication Review Group's data extraction template), pilot-tested it on ten randomly-selected included studies, and refined it accordingly. One review author extracted the following data from included studies and the second author checked the extracted data…Disagreements were resolved by discussion between the two review authors; if no agreement could be reached, it was planned a third author would decide. We contacted five authors for further information. All responded and one provided numerical data that had only been presented graphically in the published paper.