---
id: risk-of-bias-in-individual-studies
title: "11. Risk of bias in individual studies"
---

Specify the methods used to assess risk of bias in the included studies, including details of the tool(s) used, how many reviewers assessed each study and whether they worked independently, and, if applicable, details of automation tools used in the process.

## Essential elements

-   Specify the tool(s) (and version) used to assess risk of bias in the
    included studies.

-   Specify the methodological domains/components/items of the risk of
    bias tool(s) used.

-   Report whether an overall risk of bias judgment that summarised
    across domains/components/items was made, and if so, what rules were
    used to reach an overall judgment.

-   If any adaptations to an existing tool to assess risk of bias in
    studies were made (such as omitting or modifying items), specify the
    adaptations.

-   If a new risk of bias tool was developed for use in the review,
    describe the content of the tool and make it publicly accessible.

-   Report how many reviewers assessed risk of bias in each study,
    whether multiple reviewers worked independently (such as assessments
    performed by one reviewer and checked by another), and any processes
    used to resolve disagreements between assessors.

-   Report any processes used to obtain or confirm relevant information
    from study investigators.

-   If an automation tool was used to assess risk of bias in studies,
    report how the automation tool was used (such as machine learning
    models to extract sentences from articles relevant to risk of
    bias[@ref88]), how the tool was trained, and details on the tool's
    performance and internal validation.

## Explanation

Users of reviews need to know the risk of bias in the
included studies to appropriately interpret the evidence. Numerous tools
have been developed to assess study limitations for various
designs.[@ref76] However, many tools have been criticised because of
their content (which may extend beyond assessing study limitations that
have the potential to bias findings) and the way in which the items are
combined (such as scales where items are combined to yield a numerical
score) (see below).[@ref72] Reporting
details of the selected tool enables readers to assess whether the tool
focuses solely on items that have the potential to bias findings.
Reporting details of how studies were assessed (such as by one or two
authors) allows readers to assess the potential for errors in the
assessments.[@ref58] Reporting how risk of bias assessments were
incorporated into the analysis is addressed in Items 
[13e]({{< meta items.synthesis_methods_e.web_path >}}) and 
[13f]({{< meta items.synthesis_methods_f.web_path >}}).

## Assessment of risk of bias in studies and bias due to missing results {#sec-risk-of-bias}

### Terminology

The terms "quality assessment" and "critical appraisal" are often used
to describe the process of evaluating the methodological conduct or
reporting of studies.[@ref76] In PRISMA 2020, we distinguish "quality"
from "risk of bias" and have focused the relevant items and elaborations
on the latter. Risk of bias refers to the potential for study findings
to systematically deviate from the truth due to methodological flaws in
the design, conduct or analysis.[@ref72] Quality is not well defined,
but has been shown to encompass constructs beyond those that may bias
the findings, including, for example, imprecision, reporting
completeness, ethics, and applicability.[@ref77] [@ref78] [@ref79] In
systematic reviews, focus should be given to the design, conduct, and
analysis features that may lead to important bias in the findings.

### Different types of risk of bias

In PRISMA 2020, two aspects of risk of bias are considered. The first
aspect is risk of bias in the results of the individual studies included
in a systematic review. Empirical evidence and theoretical
considerations suggest that several features of study design are
associated with larger intervention effect estimates in studies; these
features include inadequate generation and concealment of a random
sequence to assign participants to groups, substantial loss to follow-up
of participants, and unblinded outcome assessment.[@ref80]

The second aspect is risk of bias in the result of a synthesis (such as
meta-analysis) due to missing studies or results within studies. Missing
studies/results may introduce bias when the decision to publish a
study/result is influenced by the observed P value or magnitude or
direction of the effect.[@ref81] For example, studies with statistically
non-significant results may not have been submitted for publication
(publication bias), or particular results that were statistically
non-significant may have been omitted from study reports (selective
non-reporting bias).[@ref82] [@ref83]

### Tools for assessing risk of bias

Many tools have been developed to assess the risk of bias in
studies[@ref76] [@ref78] [@ref79] or bias due to missing
results.[@ref84] Existing tools typically take the form of composite
scales and domain-based tools.[@ref78] [@ref85] Composite scales include
multiple items which each have a numeric score attached, from which an
overall summary score might be calculated. Domain-based tools require
users to judge risk of bias within specific domains, and to record the
information on which each judgment was based.[@ref72] [@ref86] [@ref87]
Specifying the components/domains in the tool used in the review can
help readers determine whether the tool focuses on risk of bias only or
addresses other "quality" constructs. Presenting assessments for each
component/domain in the tool is preferable to reporting a single
"quality score" because it enables users to understand the specific
components/domains that are at risk of bias in each study.

### Incorporating assessments of risk of bias in studies into the analysis

The risk of bias in included studies should be considered in the
presentation and interpretation of results of individual studies and
syntheses. Different analytic strategies may be used to examine whether
the risks of bias of the studies may influence the study results: (i)
restricting the primary analysis to studies judged to be at low risk of
bias (sensitivity analysis); (ii) stratifying studies according to risk
of bias using subgroup analysis or meta-regression; or (iii) adjusting
the result from each study in an attempt to remove the bias. Further
details about each approach are available elsewhere.[@ref72]

## Example

> "We assessed risk of bias in the included studies using the revised
Cochrane 'Risk of bias' tool for randomised trials (RoB 2.0) (Higgins
2016a), employing the additional guidance for cluster-randomised and
cross-over trials (Eldridge 2016; Higgins 2016b). RoB 2.0 addresses five
specific domains: (1) bias arising from the randomisation process; (2)
bias due to deviations from intended interventions; (3) bias due to
missing outcome data; (4) bias in measurement of the outcome; and (5)
bias in selection of the reported result. Two review authors
independently applied the tool to each included study, and recorded
supporting information and justifications for judgements of risk of bias
for each domain (low; high; some concerns). Any discrepancies in
judgements of risk of bias or justifications for judgements were
resolved by discussion to reach consensus between the two review
authors, with a third review author acting as an arbiter if necessary.
Following guidance given for RoB 2.0 (Section 1.3.4) (Higgins 2016a), we
derived an overall summary \'Risk of bias\' judgement (low; some
concerns; high) for each specific outcome, whereby the overall RoB for
each study was determined by the highest RoB level in any of the domains
that were assessed."[@ref178]