---
id: effect-measures
title: "12. Effect measures"
writing_guide:
    text:
        Which effect measurements did you use for binary outcomes such as dead or alive - odds ratio (OR), risk ratio (RR) or risk difference (RD)? 

        Which effect measurements did you use for continuous outcomes such as body mass index - mean difference (MD), standardized mean difference (SMD) or ratio of means (RoM) 

        Justify all your choices of effect measures 

        What thresholds or ranges did you use to judge whether the size of the effect was large enough to be clinically important?  Give the rationale for choosing them.   

        Were results from different studies re-expressed to a single type of effect measure in the synthesis – for example analyzing risk ratios from several different studies and calculating a single absolute risk reduction based on an assumed comparator risk 
---

Specify for each outcome the effect measure(s) (such as risk ratio, mean difference) used in the synthesis or presentation of results.

## Essential elements

-   Specify for each outcome or type of outcome (such as binary,
    continuous) the effect measure(s) (such as risk ratio, mean
    difference) used in the synthesis or presentation of results.

-   State any thresholds or ranges used to interpret the size of effect
    (such as minimally important difference; ranges for no/trivial,
    small, moderate, and large effects) and the rationale for these
    thresholds.

-   If synthesised results were re-expressed to a different effect
    measure, report the methods used to re-express results (such as
    meta-analysing risk ratios and computing an absolute risk reduction
    based on an assumed comparator risk).

## Additional elements

-   Consider providing justification for the choice of effect measure.
    For example, a standardised mean difference may have been chosen
    because multiple instruments or scales were used across studies to
    measure the same outcome domain (such as different instruments to
    assess depression).

## Explanation

To interpret a synthesised or study result, users
need to know what effect measure was used. Effect measures refer to
statistical constructs that compare outcome data between two groups. For
instance, a risk ratio is an example of an effect measure that might be
used for dichotomous outcomes.[@ref89] The chosen effect measure has
implications for interpretation of the findings and might affect the
meta-analysis results (such as heterogeneity[@ref90]). Authors might use
one effect measure to synthesise results and then re-express the
synthesised results using another effect measure. For example, for
meta-analyses of standardised mean differences, authors might re-express
the combined results in units of a well known measurement scale, and for
meta-analyses of risk ratios or odds ratios, authors might re-express
results in absolute terms (such as risk difference).[@ref91]
Furthermore, authors need to interpret effect estimates in relation to
whether the effect is of importance to decision makers. For a particular
outcome and effect measure, this requires specification of thresholds
(or ranges) used to interpret the size of effect (such as minimally
important difference; ranges for no/trivial, small, moderate, and large
effects).[@ref91]

## Example

> "We planned to analyse dichotomous outcomes by calculating the risk
ratio (RR) of a successful outcome (i.e. improvement in relevant
variables) for each trial...Because the included resilience‐training
studies used different measurement scales to assess resilience and
related constructs, we used standardised mean difference (SMD) effect
sizes (Cohen\'s d) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for
continuous data in pair‐wise meta‐analyses."[@ref179]