---
id: synthesis_methods_c
title: "13c. Synthesis methods â€“ Methods for tabulating or displaying results"
summary: 
    title: 13c. Methods for tabulating or displaying results
---

Describe any methods used to tabulate or visually display results of individual studies and syntheses

## Essential elements

-   Report chosen tabular structure(s) used to display results of
    individual studies and syntheses, along with details of the data
    presented.

-   Report chosen graphical methods used to visually display results of
    individual studies and syntheses.

## Additional elements

-   If studies are ordered or grouped within tables or graphs based on
    study characteristics (such as by size of the study effect, year of
    publication), consider reporting the basis for the chosen
    ordering/grouping.

-   If non-standard graphs were used, consider reporting the rationale
    for selecting the chosen graph.

## Explanation

Presentation of study results using tabulation and
visual display is important for transparency (particularly so for
reviews or outcomes within reviews where a meta-analysis has not been
undertaken) and facilitates the identification of patterns in the data.
Tables may be used to present results from individual studies or from a
synthesis (such as Summary of Findings table[@ref97] [@ref98]; see item
#22). The purpose of tabulating data varies but commonly includes the
complete and transparent reporting of the results or comparing the
results across study characteristics.[@ref28] Different purposes will
likely lead to different table structures. Reporting the chosen
structure(s), along with details of the data presented (such as effect
estimates), can aid users in understanding the basis and rationale for
the structure (such as, "Table have been structured by outcome domain,
within which studies are ordered from low to high risk of bias to
increase the prominence of the most trustworthy evidence.").

The principal graphical method for meta-analysis is the forest plot,
which displays the effect estimates and confidence intervals of each
study and often the summary estimate.[@ref99] [@ref100] Similar to
tabulation, ordering the studies in the forest plot based on study
characteristics (such as by size of the effect estimate, year of
publication, study weight, or overall risk of bias) rather than
alphabetically (as is often done) can reveal patterns in the
data.[@ref101] Other graphs that aim to display information about the
magnitude or direction of effects might be considered when a forest plot
cannot be used due to incompletely reported effect estimates (such as no
measure of precision reported).[@ref28] [@ref102] Careful choice and
design of graphs is required so that they effectively and accurately
represent the data.[@ref99]

## Example

> "Meta-analyses could not be undertaken due to the heterogeneity of
interventions, settings, study designs and outcome measures. Albatross
plots were created to provide a graphical overview of the data for
interventions with more than five data points for an outcome. Albatross
plots are a scatter plot of p-values against the total number of
individuals in each study. Small p-values from negative associations
appear at the left of the plot, small p-values from positive
associations at the right, and studies with null results towards the
middle. The plot allows p-values to be interpreted in the context of the
study sample size; effect contours show a standardised effect size
(expressed as relative risk---RR) for a given p-value and study size,
providing an indication of the overall magnitude of any association. We
estimated an overall magnitude of association from these contours, but
this should be interpreted cautiously."[@ref182]