---
id: 15_certainty_assessment
title: "15. Certainty assessment"
---

Describe any methods used to assess certainty (or confidence) in the body of evidence for an outcome

## Essential elements

-   Specify the tool or system (and version) used to assess certainty in
    the body of evidence.

-   Report the factors considered (such as precision of the effect
    estimate, consistency of findings across studies) and the criteria
    used to assess each factor when assessing certainty in the body of
    evidence.

-   Describe the decision rules used to arrive at an overall judgment of
    the level of certainty (such as high, moderate, low, very low),
    together with the intended interpretation (or definition) of each
    level of certainty.[@ref125]

-   If applicable, report any review-specific considerations for
    assessing certainty, such as thresholds used to assess imprecision
    and ranges of magnitude of effect that might be considered trivial,
    moderate or large, and the rationale for these thresholds and ranges
    ([item 12]({{< meta items.effect_measures.web_path >}})).[@ref129]

-   If any adaptations to an existing tool or system to assess certainty
    were made, specify the adaptations in sufficient detail that the
    approach is replicable.

-   Report how many reviewers assessed the certainty of evidence,
    whether multiple reviewers worked independently, and any processes
    used to resolve disagreements between assessors.

-   Report any processes used to obtain or confirm relevant information
    from investigators.

-   If an automation tool was used to support the assessment of
    certainty, report how the automation tool was used, how the tool was
    trained, and details on the tool's performance and internal
    validation.

-   Describe methods for reporting the results of assessments of
    certainty, such as the use of Summary of Findings tables (see [item 22]({{< meta items.certainty_of_evidence.web_path >}})).

-   If standard phrases that incorporate the certainty of evidence were
    used (such as "hip protectors probably reduce the risk of hip
    fracture slightly"),[@ref130] report the intended interpretation of
    each phrase and the reference for the source guidance.

Where a published system is adhered to, it may be sufficient to briefly
describe the factors considered and the decision rules for reaching an
overall judgment and reference the source guidance for full details of
assessment criteria.

## Explanation 

Authors typically use some criteria to decide how
certain (or confident) they are in the body of evidence for each
important outcome. Common factors considered include precision of the
effect estimate (or sample size), consistency of findings across
studies, study design limitations and missing results (risk of bias),
and how directly the studies address the question. Tools and frameworks
can be used to provide a systematic, explicit approach to assessing
these factors and provide a common approach and terminology for
communicating certainty.[@ref125] [@ref126] [@ref127] [@ref128] For
example, using the GRADE approach, authors will first apply criteria to
assess each GRADE domain (imprecision, inconsistency, risk of bias, and
so forth) and then make an overall judgment of whether the evidence
supporting a result is of high, moderate, low, or very low certainty.
Reporting the factors considered and the criteria used to assess each
factor enables readers to determine which factors fed into reviewers'
assessment of certainty. Reporting the process by which assessments were
conducted enables readers to assess the potential for errors and
facilitates replication.

## Example

> "Two people (AM, JS) independently assessed the certainty of the
evidence. We used the five GRADE considerations (study limitations,
consistency of effect, imprecision, indirectness, and publication bias)
to assess the certainty of the body of evidence as it related to the
studies that contributed data to the meta-analyses for the prespecified
outcomes. We assessed the certainty of evidence as high, moderate, low,
or very low. We considered the following criteria for upgrading the
certainty of evidence, if appropriate: large effect, dose-response
gradient, and plausible confounding effect. We used the methods and
recommendations described in sections 8.5 and 8.7, and chapters 11 and
12, of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. We
used GRADEpro GDT software to prepare the \'Summary of findings\' tables
(GRADEpro GDT 2015). We justified all decisions to down- or up-grade the
certainty of studies using footnotes, and we provided comments to aid
the reader's understanding of the results where necessary."[@ref188]