---
id: title
title: "1. Title"
checklist: "Identify the report as a systematic review."
---

## Essential elements

* Identify the report as a systematic review in the title.

* Report an informative title that provides key information about the 
main objective or question that the review addresses. For reviews of
interventions, this usually includes the population and the
intervention(s) that the review addresses.

<!-- #ASK - this second 'essential' element is missing from the checklist text -->

## Additional elements

Consider providing additional information in the title, such as the
method of analysis used (for example, "a systematic review with
meta-analysis"), the designs of included studies (for example, "a
systematic review of randomised trials"), or an indication that the
review is an update of an existing review or a continually updated
("living") systematic review.

## Explanation

Inclusion of "systematic review" in the title
facilitates identification by potential users (patients, healthcare
providers, policy makers, etc) and appropriate indexing in databases.
Terms such as "review," "literature review," "evidence synthesis," or
"knowledge synthesis" are not recommended because they do not
distinguish systematic and non-systematic approaches. We also discourage
using the terms "systematic review" and "meta-analysis" interchangeably
because a systematic review refers to the entire set of processes used
to identify, select, and synthesise evidence, whereas meta-analysis
refers only to the statistical synthesis. Furthermore, a meta-analysis
can be done outside the context of a systematic review (for example,
when researchers meta-analyse results from a limited set of studies that
they have conducted).

## Example 

> Comparison of the therapeutic effects of rivaroxaban versus warfarin in antiphospholipid syndrome: a systematic review[@ref167]