---
id: discussion-general-interpretation
title: "23a. Discussion – General interpretation of the results"
summary:
    title: 23a. General interpretation of the results
    text: Provide a general interpretation of the results in the context of other evidence.
writing_guide:
    text: |
---

Provide a general interpretation of the results in the context of other evidence

## Essential elements

-   Provide a general interpretation of the results in the context of
    other evidence.

## Explanation 

Discussing how the results of the review relate to
other relevant evidence should help readers interpret the findings. For
example, authors might compare the current results to results of other
similar systematic reviews (such as reviews that addressed the same
question using different methods or that addressed slightly different
questions) and explore possible reasons for discordant results.
Similarly, authors might summarise additional information relevant to
decision makers that was not explored in the review, such as findings of
studies evaluating the cost-effectiveness of the intervention or surveys
gauging the values and preferences of patients.

## Example

> "Although we need to exercise caution in interpreting these findings
because of the small number of studies, these findings nonetheless
appear to be largely in line with the recent systematic review on what
works to improve education outcomes in low‐ and middle‐income countries
of Snilstveit et al. (2012). They found that structured pedagogical
interventions may be among the effective approaches to improve learning
outcomes in low‐ and middle‐income countries. This is consistent with
our findings that teacher training is only effective in improving early
grade literacy outcomes when it is combined with teacher coaching. The
finding is also consistent with our result that technology in education
programs may have at best no effects unless they are combined with a
focus on pedagogical practices. In line with our study, Snilstveit et
al. (2012) also do not find evidence for statistically significant
effects of the one‐laptop‐per‐child program. These results are
consistent with the results of a meta‐analysis showing that technology
in education programs are not effective when not accompanied by parent
or student training (McEwan, 2015). However, neither Snilstveit et al.
(2012) nor McEwan (2015) find evidence for negative effects of the
one‐laptop‐per‐child program on early grade literacy outcomes."[@ref197]