---
id: discussion-limitations-of-review-process
title: "23c. Discussion â€“ Limitations of the review processes"
summary:
    title: 23c. Limitations of the review processes
    text: Discuss any limitations of the review processes used.
writing_guide:
    text: |

---
Discuss any limitations of the review processes used

## Essential elements

-   Discuss any limitations of the review processes used and comment on
    the potential impact of each limitation.

## Explanation

Discussing limitations, avoidable or unavoidable, in
the review process should help readers understand the trustworthiness of
the review findings. For example, authors might acknowledge the decision
to restrict eligibility to studies in English only, search only a small
number of databases, have only one reviewer screen records or collect
data, or not contact study authors to clarify unclear information. They
might also acknowledge that they were unable to access all potentially
eligible study reports or to carry out some of the planned analyses
because of insufficient data.[@ref149] [@ref150] While some limitations
may affect the validity of the review findings, others may not.

## Example

> "Because of time constraints...we dually screened only 30% of the titles
and abstracts; for the rest, we used single screening. A recent study
showed that single abstract screening misses up to 13% of relevant
studies (Gartlehner 2020). In addition, single review authors rated risk
of bias, conducted data extraction and rated certainty of evidence. A
second review author checked the plausibility of decisions and the
correctness of data. Because these steps were not conducted dually and
independently, we introduced some risk of error...Nevertheless, we are
confident that none of these methodological limitations would change the
overall conclusions of this review. Furthermore, we limited publications
to English and Chinese languages. Because COVID-19 has become a rapidly
evolving pandemic, we might have missed recent publications in languages
of countries that have become heavily affected in the meantime (e.g.
Italian or Spanish)." [@ref199]