---
id: discussion_implications
title: "23d. Discussion – Implications"
summary:
    title: 23d. Implications
---

Discuss implications of the results for practice, policy, and future research

## Essential elements

-   Discuss implications of the results for practice and policy.

-   Make explicit recommendations for future research.

## Explanation

There are many potential end users of a systematic
review (such as patients, healthcare providers, researchers, insurers,
and policy makers), each of whom will want to know what actions they
should take given the review findings. Patients and healthcare providers
may be primarily interested in the balance of benefits and harms, while
policy makers and administrators may value data on organisational impact
and resource utilisation. For reviews of interventions, authors might
clarify trade-offs between benefits and harms and how the values
attached to the most important outcomes of the review might lead
different people to make different decisions. In addition, rather than
making recommendations for practice or policy that apply universally,
authors might discuss factors that are important in translating the
evidence to different settings and factors that may modify the magnitude
of effects.

Explicit recommendations for future research---as opposed to general
statements such as "More research on this question is needed"---can
better direct the questions future studies should address and the
methods that should be used. For example, authors might consider
describing the type of understudied participants who should be enrolled
in future studies, the specific interventions that could be compared,
suggested outcome measures to use, and ideal study design features to
employ.

## Example

> "Implications for practice and policy: Findings from this review
indicate that bystander programs have significant beneficial effects on
bystander intervention behaviour. This provides important evidence of
the effectiveness of mandated programs on college campuses.
Additionally, the fact that our (preliminary) moderator analyses found
program effects on bystander intervention to be similar for adolescents
and college students suggests early implementation of bystander programs
(i.e. in secondary schools with adolescents) may be warranted.
Importantly, although we found that bystander programs had a significant
beneficial effect on bystander intervention behaviour, we found no
evidence that these programs had an effect on participants\' sexual
assault perpetration. Bystander programs may therefore be appropriate
for targeting bystander behaviour, but may not be appropriate for
targeting the behaviour of potential perpetrators. Additionally, effects
of bystander programs on bystander intervention behaviour diminished by
6‐month post‐intervention. Thus, programs effects may be prolonged by
the implementation of booster sessions conducted prior to 6 months
post‐intervention.
> 
> Implications for research: Findings from this review suggest there is a
fairly strong body of research assessing the effects of bystander
programs on attitudes and behaviours. However, there are a couple of
important questions worth further exploration...Our understanding of the
causal mechanisms of program effects on bystander behaviour would
benefit from further analysis (e.g., path analysis mapping relationships
between specific knowledge/attitude effects and bystander
intervention)...Our understanding of the differential effects of
gendered versus gender neutral programs would benefit from the design
and implementation of high-quality primary studies that make direct
comparisons between these two types of programs (e.g., RCTs comparing
the effects of two active treatment arms that differ in their gendered
approach)...Our understanding of bystander programs\' generalizability
to non-US contexts would be greatly enhanced by high quality research
conducted across the world."[@ref200]