---
id: registration-and-protocol-registration
title: "24a. Registration and protocol â€“ Registration"
summary:
    title: 24a. Registration
writing_guide:
    text: |

---

Provide registration information for the review, including register name and registration number, or state that the review was not registered

## Essential elements

-   Provide registration information for the review, including register
    name and registration number, or state that the review was not
    registered.

## Explanation

Stating where the systematic review was registered
(such as PROSPERO, Open Science Framework) and the registration number
or DOI for the register entry facilitates identification of the
systematic review in the register. This allows readers to compare what
was pre-specified with what was eventually reported in the review and
decide if any deviations may have introduced bias. Reporting
registration information also facilitates linking of publications
related to the same systematic review (such as when a review is
presented at a conference and published in a journal).[@ref154]

## Systematic review registration and protocols

Registration aims to reduce bias, increase transparency, facilitate
scrutiny and improve trustworthiness of systematic reviews.[@ref151]
[@ref152] Registration also aims to reduce unintended duplication;
researchers planning a new review should search register listings to
identify similar completed or ongoing reviews before deciding whether
their review is needed, noting that planned duplication may be
justified.[@ref151]

A registration entry captures key elements of the review protocol and is
submitted to a host register, ideally before starting the review. The
register maintains a permanent public record of this information along
with any subsequent amendments (date-stamped) and issues a unique number
to link the registration entry to completed review
publications.[@ref153] Publicly recording details of inclusion and
exclusion criteria, planned outcomes, and syntheses enables peer
reviewers, journal editors, and readers to compare the completed review
with what was planned, identify any deviations, and decide whether these
may have introduced bias.

PROSPERO
([www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/](http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/))
currently registers systematic reviews with direct health outcomes. It
also accepts systematic reviews of animal studies that have direct
implications for human health, and methodology reviews which have direct
bearing on human health or systematic review conduct. Reviews not
meeting the criteria for inclusion in PROSPERO could be registered
elsewhere; for example, in the Open Science Framework (OSF) repository.
Both PROSPERO and OSF allow for registration without cost.

A review protocol is distinct from a register entry for a review. A
review protocol outlines in detail the pre-planned objectives and
methods intended to be used to conduct the review, helping to
anticipate/avoid potential problems before embarking on a review and
providing a methodical approach to prevent arbitrary decision making
during the review process.[@ref22] Systematic reviewers are encouraged
to report their protocols in accordance with the PRISMA guidance for
protocols (PRISMA-P).[@ref21] PRISMA-P consists of a checklist[@ref21]
accompanied by a detailed guidance document providing researchers with a
step-by-step approach for documenting a systematic review
protocol.[@ref22]

A review protocol should be a public document in order to facilitate
future purposeful replications or updates of the review and to help
future users evaluate whether selective reporting and potential bias
were present in the review process.[@ref22] Review protocols can be made
public through one of several routes. One option is to upload a PDF of
the protocol to the corresponding PROSPERO registration record so they
are linked in perpetuity. Another option is to make a protocol a
document with its own unique identifier (that is, a DOI) so it can be
cited across various documents including the PROSPERO registration
record and in the full text of the completed review. To achieve this,
reviewers may opt to publish a protocol in a journal that is open access
or provides free access to content (such as *Systematic Reviews*, *BMJ
Open*) or a journal using the Registered Reports publishing framework
(<https://cos.io/rr/>), where it will benefit from external feedback
before publication, or deposit a protocol in a general purpose or
institutional open access repository (such as Open Science Framework
Registries, Zenodo).

## Example

> "...this systematic review has been registered in the international
prospective register of systematic reviews (PROSPERO) under the
registration number: CRD42019128569"[@ref201]
