---
id: support
title: "25. Support"
summary:
    text: Describe sources of financial or non-financial support for the review, and the role of the funders or sponsors in the review.
---

Describe sources of financial or non-financial support for the review, and the role of the funders or sponsors in the review

## Essential elements

- Describe sources of financial or non-financial support for the
    review, specifying relevant grant ID numbers for each funder. If no
    specific financial or non-financial support was received, this
    should be stated.

- Describe the role of the funders or sponsors (or both) in the
    review. If funders or sponsors had no role in the review, this
    should be declared---for example, by stating, "The funders had no
    role in the design of the review, data collection and analysis,
    decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."

## Explanation

As with any research report, authors should be
transparent about the sources of support received to conduct the review.
For example, funders may provide salary to researchers to undertake the
review, the services of an information specialist to conduct searches,
or access to commercial databases that would otherwise not have been
available. Authors may have also obtained support from a translation
service to translate articles or in-kind use of software to manage or
analyse the study data. In some reviews, the funder or sponsor (that is,
the individual or organisation assuming responsibility for the
initiation and management of the review) may have contributed to
defining the review question, determining eligibility of studies,
collecting data, analysing data, interpreting results, or approving the
final review report. There is potential for bias in the review findings
arising from such involvement, particularly when the funder or sponsor
has an interest in obtaining a particular result.[@ref157]

## Example

> "Funding/Support: This research was funded under contract
HHSA290201500009i, Task Order 7, from the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (AHRQ), US Department of Health and Human Services, under a
contract to support the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). Role
of the Funder/Sponsor: Investigators worked with USPSTF members and AHRQ
staff to develop the scope, analytic framework, and key questions for
this review. AHRQ had no role in study selection, quality assessment, or
synthesis. AHRQ staff provided project oversight, reviewed the report to
ensure that the analysis met methodological standards, and distributed
the draft for peer review. Otherwise, AHRQ had no role in the conduct of
the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the
data; and preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript findings.
The opinions expressed in this document are those of the authors and do
not reflect the official position of AHRQ or the US Department of Health
and Human Services."[@ref204]
