---
id: availability_of_materials
title: "27. Availability of data, code, and other materials"
---

Report which of the following are publicly available and where they can be found: template data collection forms; data extracted from included studies; data used for all analyses; analytic code; any other materials used in the review

## Essential elements

-   Report which of the following are publicly available: template data
    collection forms; data extracted from included studies; data used
    for all analyses; analytic code; any other materials used in the
    review.

-   If any of the above materials are publicly available, report where
    they can be found (such as provide a link to files deposited in a
    public repository).

-   If data, analytic code, or other materials will be made available
    upon request, provide the contact details of the author responsible
    for sharing the materials and describe the circumstances under which
    such materials will be shared.

## Explanation

Sharing of data, analytic code, and other materials
enables others to reuse the data, check the data for errors, attempt to
reproduce the findings, and understand more about the analysis than may
be provided by descriptions of methods.[@ref161] [@ref162] Support for
sharing of data, analytic code, and other materials is growing,
including from patients[@ref163] and journal editors, including *BMJ*
and *PLOS Medicine*.[@ref164]

Sharing of data, analytic code, and other materials relevant to a
systematic review includes making various items publicly available, such
as the template data collection forms; all data extracted from included
studies; a file indicating necessary data conversions; the clean
dataset(s) used for all analyses in a format ready for reuse (such as
CSV file); metadata (such as complete descriptions of variable names,
README files describing each file shared); analytic code used in
software with a command-line interface or complete descriptions of the
steps used in point-and-click software to run all analyses. Other
materials might include more detailed information about the intervention
delivered in the primary studies that are otherwise not available, such
as a video of the specific cognitive behavioural therapy supplied by the
study investigators to reviewers.[@ref73] Similarly, other material
might include a list of all citations screened and any decisions about
eligibility.

Because sharing of data, analytic code, and other materials is not yet
universal in health and medical research,[@ref164] even interested
authors may not know how to make their materials publicly available.
Data, analytic code, and other materials can be uploaded to one of
several publicly accessible repositories (such as Open Science
Framework, Dryad, figshare). The Systematic Review Data Repository
(<https://srdr.ahrq.gov/>) is another example of a platform for sharing
materials specific to the systematic review community.[@ref165] All of
these open repositories should be given consideration, particularly if
the completed review is to be considered for publication in a paywalled
journal. The Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable (FAIR) data
principles are also a useful resource for authors to consult,[@ref166]
as they provide guidance on the best way to share information.

There are some situations where authors might not be able to share
review materials, such as when the review team are custodians rather
than owners of individual participant data, or when there are legal or
licensing restrictions. For example, records exported directly from
bibliographic databases (such as Ovid MEDLINE) typically include
copyrighted material; authors should read the licensing terms of the
databases they search to see what they can share and to consider the
copyright legislation of their countries.

## Example

> "All meta-analytic data and all codebooks and analysis scripts (for
Mplus and R) are publicly available at the study's associated page on
the Open Science Framework (<https://osf.io/r8a24/>)\...The precise
sources (table, section, or paragraph) for each estimate are described
in notes in the master data spreadsheet, available on the Open Science
Framework page for this study (<https://osf.io/r8a24/>)"[@ref206]
