---
id: 3_rationale
title: "3. Rationale"
checklist: Describe the rationale for the review in the context of existing knowledge.
---

Describe the rationale for the review in the context of existing knowledge

## Essential elements

-   Describe the current state of knowledge and its uncertainties.

-   Articulate why it is important to do the review.

-   If other systematic reviews addressing the same (or a largely
    similar) question are available, explain why the current review was
    considered necessary (for example, previous reviews are out of date
    or have discordant results; new review methods are available to
    address the review question; existing reviews are methodologically
    flawed; or the current review was commissioned to inform a guideline
    or policy for a particular organisation). If the review is an update
    or replication of a particular systematic review, indicate this and
    cite the previous review.

-   If the review examines the effects of interventions, also briefly
    describe how the intervention(s) examined might work.

## Additional elements

-   If there is complexity in the intervention or context of its
    delivery, or both (such as multi-component interventions,
    interventions targeting the population and individual level, equity
    considerations[@ref30]), consider presenting a logic model
    (sometimes referred to as a conceptual framework or theory of
    change) to visually display the hypothesised relationship between
    intervention components and outcomes.[@ref31] [@ref32]


## Explanation

Describing the rationale should help readers
understand why the review was conducted and what the review might add to
existing knowledge.

## Example

> "To contain widespread infection and to reduce morbidity and mortality
among health-care workers and others in contact with potentially
infected people, jurisdictions have issued conflicting advice about
physical or social distancing. Use of face masks with or without eye
protection to achieve additional protection is debated in the mainstream
media and by public health authorities, in particular the use of face
masks for the general population; moreover, optimum use of face masks in
health-care settings, which have been used for decades for infection
prevention, is facing challenges amid personal protective equipment
(PPE) shortages. Any recommendations about social or physical
distancing, and the use of face masks, should be based on the best
available evidence. Evidence has been reviewed for other respiratory
viral infections, mainly seasonal influenza, but no comprehensive review
is available of information on SARS-CoV-2 or related betacoronaviruses
that have caused epidemics, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) or Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). We, therefore,
systematically reviewed the effect of physical distance, face masks, and
eye protection on transmission of SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and
MERS-CoV."[@ref169]