---
id: eligibility-criteria
title: "5. Eligibility criteria"
summary: 
    text: Specify the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the review and how studies were grouped for the syntheses.
writing_guide: 
    text: >-
        What are the characteristics of the studies you included in the review?   

        What sort of people were being investigated? Were they healthy, or if not, what condition did they have and how was their condition diagnosed?  

        What treatment or treatments, or other type of intervention was being investigated in the studies? 

        What setting or settings were the studies carried out in? 

        What type of quantitative studies were included, randomised trials?  Any trials?  Observational studies?  A mixture? 

        What was the primary outcome of interest?   

        How did you treat studies where the outcome of interest wasn’t measured? 

        How did you group studies which differed in other ways such as age of participants, or length of follow up?


        Did you exclude studies for other reasons, such as when and where the results were published, and in what language? 

        Did you include unpublished studies, or studies reported in conference abstracts or on study registers?  

        Did you exclude studies if the outcomes of interest weren’t reported 


        Did you put the included studies into groups for analysis?   

        Did you group studies according to the design? 

        Did you group the studies depending on differences in the participant characteristics such as how they were diagnosed, or age, sex? 

        Did you group the studies according to variations in type of treatment, or how it was delivered?  

        Did you group the studies according to the primary outcome? 

        Did you group the studies according to the length of follow up? 

        How does your choice of groups support the objectives of the review?
---

Specify the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the review and how studies were grouped for the syntheses

## Essential elements

-   Specify all study characteristics used to decide whether a study was
    eligible for inclusion in the review, that is, components described
    in the PICO framework or one of its variants,[@ref33] [@ref34] and
    other characteristics, such as eligible study design(s) and
    setting(s) and minimum duration of follow-up.

-   Specify eligibility criteria with regard to report characteristics,
    such as year of dissemination, language, and report status (for
    example, whether reports such as unpublished manuscripts and
    conference abstracts were eligible for inclusion).

-   Clearly indicate if studies were ineligible because the outcomes of
    interest were not measured, or ineligible because the results for
    the outcome of interest were not reported. Reporting that studies
    were excluded because they had "no relevant outcome data" is
    ambiguous and should be avoided.[@ref39]

-   Specify any groups used in the synthesis (such as intervention,
    outcome, and population groups) and link these to the comparisons
    specified in the objectives (item #4).

## Additional elements

-   Consider providing rationales for any notable restrictions to study
    eligibility. For example, authors might explain that the review was
    restricted to studies published from 2000 onward because that was
    the year the device was first available.

***Explanation:*** Specifying the criteria used to decide what evidence
was eligible or ineligible in sufficient detail should enable readers to
understand the scope of the review and verify inclusion
decisions.[@ref35] The PICO framework is commonly used to structure the
reporting of eligibility criteria for reviews of interventions.[@ref36]
In addition to specifying the review PICO, the intervention, outcome,
and population groups that were used in the syntheses need to be
identified and defined.[@ref37] For example, in a review examining the
effects of psychological interventions for smoking cessation in
pregnancy, the authors specified intervention groups (counselling,
health education, feedback, incentive-based interventions, social
support, and exercise) and the defining components of each
group.[@ref38]



## Example

"Population: We included randomized controlled trials of adult (age ≥18
years) patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery, excluding organ
transplantation surgery (as findings in patients who need
immunosuppression may not be generalisable to others).

"Intervention: We considered all perioperative care interventions
identified by the search if they were protocolised (therapies were
systematically provided to patients according to pre-defined algorithm
or plan) and were started and completed during the perioperative pathway
(that is, during preoperative preparation for surgery, intraoperative
care, or inpatient postoperative recovery). Examples of interventions
that we did or did not deem perioperative in nature included long term
preoperative drug treatment (not included, as not started and completed
during the perioperative pathway) and perioperative physiotherapy
interventions (included, as both started and completed during the
perioperative pathway). We excluded studies in which the intervention
was directly related to surgical technique.

Outcomes: To be included, a trial had to use a defined clinical outcome
relating to postoperative pulmonary complications, such as "pneumonia"
diagnosed according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's
definition. Randomized controlled trials reporting solely physiological
(for example, lung volumes and flow measurements) or biochemical (for
example, lung inflammatory markers) outcomes are valuable but neither
patient centric nor necessarily clinically relevant, and we therefore
excluded them. We applied no language restrictions. Our primary outcome
measure was the incidence of postoperative pulmonary complications, with
postoperative pulmonary complications being defined as the composite of
any of respiratory infection, respiratory failure, pleural effusion,
atelectasis, or pneumothorax...Where a composite postoperative pulmonary
complication was not reported, we contacted corresponding authors via
email to request additional information, including primary
data."[@ref171]