---
id: objectives
title: 13. Objectives
checklist: 
    text: Clearly describe the research question, research objectives and, where appropriate, specific hypotheses being tested.
---

## What to write

Clearly describe the research question, research objectives and, where
appropriate, specific hypotheses being tested.

## Explanation

Explaining the purpose of the study by describing the
question(s) that the research addresses allows readers to determine
whether the study is relevant to them. Readers can also assess the
relevance of the model organism, procedures, outcomes measured, and
analysis used.

Knowing whether a study is exploratory or hypothesis-testing is critical
to its interpretation. A typical exploratory study may measure multiple
outcomes and look for patterns in the data or relationships that can be
used to generate hypotheses. It may also be a pilot study, which aims to
inform the design or feasibility of larger subsequent experiments.
Exploratory research helps researchers to design hypothesis-testing
experiments by choosing what variables or outcome measures to focus on
in subsequent studies.

Testing a specific hypothesis has implications for both the study design
and the data analysis [@pbio.3000411.ref016; @pbio.3000411.ref167].
For example, an experiment designed to detect a hypothesised effect will
likely need to be analysed with inferential statistics, and a
statistical estimation of the sample size will need to be performed a
priori (see Item 2. Sample size). Hypothesis-testing studies also have a
predefined primary outcome measure, which is used to assess the evidence
in support of the specific research question (see Item 6. Outcome
measures).

In contrast, exploratory research investigates many possible effects and
is likely to yield more false positive results because some will be
positive by chance. Thus, results from well-designed hypothesis-testing
studies provide stronger evidence than those from exploratory or
descriptive studies. Independent replication and meta-analysis can
further increase the confidence in conclusions.

Clearly outline the objective(s) of the study, including whether it is
hypothesis-testing or exploratory, or if it includes research of both
types. Hypothesis-testing studies may collect additional information for
exploratory purposes; it is important to distinguish which hypotheses
were prespecified and which originated after data inspection, especially
when reporting unanticipated effects or outcomes that were not part of
the original study design.

## Examples

> 'The primary objective of this study was to investigate the cellular
immune response to MSC injected into the striatum of allogeneic
recipients (6-hydroxydopamine 6-OHDA-hemilesioned rats, an animal
model of Parkinson's disease PD), and the secondary objective was to
determine the ability of these cells to prevent nigrostriatal dopamine
depletion and associated motor deficits in these animals'
[@pbio.3000411.ref168].

> 'In this exploratory study, we aimed to investigate whether calcium
electroporation could initiate an anticancer immune response similar to
electrochemotherapy. To this end, we treated immunocompetent balb/c mice
with CT26 colon tumors with calcium electroporation,
electrochemotherapy, or ultrasound-based delivery of calcium or
bleomycin' [@pbio.3000411.ref169].

> 'While characterizing a *rab-6*.*2*-null *C*. *elegans* strain for
another study, we observed that *rab-6*.*2(ok2254)* animals were
fragile. We set out to analyze the fragile-skin phenotype in
*rab-6*.*2(ok2254)* animals genetically.... We observed several ruptured
animals on our *rab-6*.*2(ok2254)* culture plates during normal
maintenance, a phenotype very rarely observed in wild-type cultures....
We hypothesized that RAB-6.2 is required for skin integrity'
[@pbio.3000411.ref170].
