---
id: adverse-events
title: 16b. Adverse events
checklist: 
    text: Report any expected or unexpected adverse events.
---

## What to write

Report any expected or unexpected adverse events.

## Explanation

Reporting adverse events allows other researchers to
plan appropriate welfare assessments and minimise the risk of these
events occurring in their own studies. If the experiment is testing the
efficacy of a treatment, the occurrence of adverse events may alter the
balance between treatment benefit and risk [@pbio.3000411.ref034].

Report any adverse events that had a negative impact on the welfare of
the animals in the study (e.g., cardiovascular and respiratory
depression, central nervous system disturbance, hypothermia, reduction
of food intake). Indicate whether they were expected or unexpected. If
adverse events were not observed, or not recorded during the study,
explicitly state this.

## Examples

> 'Murine lymph node tumors arose in 11 of 12 mice that received
N2-transduced human cells. The *neo* gene could be detected in murine
cells as well as in human cells. Significant lymphoproliferation could
be seen only in the murine pre-T cells. It took 5 months for murine
leukemia to arise; the affected mice displayed symptoms of extreme
sickness rapidly, with 5 of the 12 mice becoming moribund on exactly the
same day (Figure ...), and 6 others becoming moribund within a 1-month
period.... Of the 12 mice that had received N2-transduced human cells,
11 had to be killed because they developed visibly enlarged lymph nodes
and spleen, hunching, and decrease in body weight, as shown in
Figure.... The 12th mouse was observed carefully for 14 months; it did
not show any signs of leukemia or other adverse events, and had no
abnormal tissues when it was autopsied.... The mice were observed at
least once daily for signs of illness, which were defined as any one or
more of the following: weight loss, hunching, lethargy, rapid breathing,
skin discoloration or irregularities, bloating, hemi-paresis, visibly
enlarged lymph nodes, and visible solid tumors under the skin. Any signs
of illness were logged as "adverse events" in the experiment, the mouse
was immediately killed, and an autopsy was performed to establish the
cause of illness' [@pbio.3000411.ref217].

> 'Although procedures were based on those reported in the literature,
dogs under Protocol 1 displayed high levels of stress and many
experienced vomiting. This led us to significantly alter procedures in
order to optimize the protocol for the purposes of our own fasting and
postprandial metabolic studies' [@pbio.3000411.ref218].
