---
id: generalisability
title: 18. Generalisability/translation
checklist: 
    text: Comment on whether, and how, the findings of this study are likely to generalise to other species or experimental conditions, including any relevance to human biology (where appropriate).
---

## What to write

Comment on whether, and how, the findings of this study are likely to
generalise to other species or experimental conditions, including any
relevance to human biology (where appropriate).

## Explanation

An important purpose of publishing research findings is
to inform future research. In the context of animal studies, this might
take the form of further in vivo research or another research domain
(e.g., human clinical trial). Thoughtful consideration is warranted, as
additional unnecessary animal studies are wasteful and unethical.
Similarly, human clinical trials initiated based on insufficient or
misleading animal research evidence increase research waste and
negatively influence the risk-benefit balance for research participants
[@pbio.3000411.ref229; @pbio.3000411.ref232].

Consider the type of study conducted to assess the implications of the
findings. Well-designed hypothesis-testing studies provide more robust
evidence than exploratory studies (see Item 13. Objectives). Findings
from a novel, exploratory study may be used to inform future research in
a broadly similar context. Alternatively, enough evidence may have
accumulated in the literature to justify further research in another
species or in humans. Discuss what (if any) further research may be
required to allow generalisation or translation. Discuss and interpret
the results in relation to current evidence and, in particular, whether
similar [@pbio.3000411.ref233] or otherwise supportive
[@pbio.3000411.ref234] findings have been reported by other groups.
Discuss the range of circumstances in which the effect is observed and
factors that may moderate that effect. Such factors could include, for
example, the population (e.g., age, sex, strain, species), the
intervention (e.g., different drugs of the same class), and the outcome
measured (e.g., different approaches to assessing memory).

## Examples

> 'Our results demonstrate that hDBS robustly modulates the mesolimbic
network. This finding may hold clinical relevance for hippocampal DBS
therapy in epilepsy cases, as connectivity in this network has
previously been shown to be suppressed in mTLE. Further research is
necessary to investigate potential DBS-induced restoration of
MTLE-induced loss of functional connectivity in mesolimbic brain
structures' [@pbio.3000411.ref235].

> 'The tumor suppressor effects of *GAS1* had been previously reported in
cell cultures or in xenograft models, this is the first work in which
the suppressor activity of murine *Gas1* is reported for primary tumors
*in vivo*. Recent advances in the design of safe vectors for transgene
delivery... may result in extrapolating our results to humans and so a
promising field of research emerges in the area of hepatic, neoplastic
diseases' [@pbio.3000411.ref236].
