---
id: confounders
title: 4b. Confounders
checklist: 
    text: Describe the strategy used to minimise potential confounders such as the order of treatments and measurements, or animal/cage location. If confounders were not controlled, state this explicitly.
---

## What to write

Describe the strategy used to minimise potential confounders
such as the order of treatments and measurements, or animal/cage
location. If confounders were not controlled, state this
explicitly.

## Explanation

Ensuring there is no systematic difference between
animals in different groups apart from the experimental exposure is an
important principle throughout the conduct of the experiment.
Identifying nuisance variables (sources of variability or conditions
that could potentially bias results) and managing them in the design and
analysis increases the sensitivity of the experiment. For example,
rodents in cages at the top of the rack may be exposed to higher light
levels, which can affect stress [@pbio.3000411.ref077].

Reporting the strategies implemented to minimise potential differences
that arise between treatment groups during the course of the experiment
enables others to assess the internal validity. Strategies to report
include standardising (keeping conditions the same, e.g., all surgeries
done by the same surgeon), randomising (e.g., the sampling or
measurement order), and blocking or counterbalancing (e.g., position of
animal cages or tanks on the rack), to ensure groups are similarly
affected by a source of variability. In some cases, practical
constraints prevent some nuisance variables from being randomised, but
they can still be accounted for in the analysis (see Item 7. Statistical
methods).

Report the methods used to minimise confounding factors alongside the
methods used to allocate animals to groups. If no measures were used to
minimise confounders (e.g., treatment order, measurement order, cage or
tank position on a rack), explicitly state this and explain why.

## Examples

> 'Randomisation was carried out as follows. On arrival from El-Nile
Company, animals were assigned a group designation and weighed. A total
number of 32 animals were divided into four different weight groups
(eight animals per group). Each animal was assigned a temporary random
number within the weight range group. On the basis of their position on
the rack, cages were given a numerical designation. For each group, a
cage was selected randomly from the pool of all cages. Two animals were
removed from each weight range group and given their permanent numerical
designation in the cages. Then, the cages were randomized within the
exposure group' [@pbio.3000411.ref078].

> '... test time was between 08.30am to 12.30pm and testing order was
randomized daily, with each animal tested at a different time each test
day' [@pbio.3000411.ref079].

> 'Bulls were blocked by BW into four blocks of 905 animals with similar
BW and then within each block, bulls were randomly assigned to one of
four experimental treatments in a completely randomized block design
resulting in 905 animals per treatment. Animals were allocated to 20
pens (181 animals per pen and five pens per treatment)'
[@pbio.3000411.ref080].
