---
id: experimental-animals-further-information
title: 8b. Further Information
checklist: 
    text: Provide further relevant information on the provenance of animals, health/immune status, genetic modification status, genotype, and any previous procedures.
---

## What to write

Provide further relevant information on the provenance of animals, health/immune status, genetic modification status, genotype, and any previous procedures.

## Explanation

The animals' provenance, their health or immune status,
and their history of previous testing or procedures can influence their
physiology and behaviour, as well as their response to treatments, and
thus impact on study outcomes. For example, animals of the same strain
but from different sources, or animals obtained from the same source but
at different times, may be genetically different
[@pbio.3000411.ref016]. The immune or microbiological status of the
animals can also influence welfare, experimental variability, and
scientific outcomes [@pbio.3000411.ref112; @pbio.3000411.ref113; @pbio.3000411.ref114].

Report the health status of all animals used in the study and any
previous procedures the animals have undergone. For example, if animals
are specific pathogen free (SPF), list the pathogens that they were
declared free of. If health status is unknown or was not tested,
explicitly state this.

For genetically modified animals, describe the genetic modification
status (e.g., knockout, overexpression), genotype (e.g., homozygous,
heterozygous), manipulated gene(s), genetic methods and technologies
used to generate the animals, how the genetic modification was
confirmed, and details of animals used as controls (e.g., littermate
controls [@pbio.3000411.ref115]).

Reporting the correct nomenclature is crucial to understanding the data
and ensuring that the research is discoverable and replicable
[@pbio.3000411.ref116; @pbio.3000411.ref117; @pbio.3000411.ref118]. Useful resources for
reporting nomenclature for different species include

- Mice---International Committee on Standardized Genetic Nomenclature
    (<https://www.jax.org/jax-mice-and-services/customer-support/technical-support/genetics-and-nomenclature>)
- Rats---Rat Genome and Nomenclature Committee
    (<https://rgd.mcw.edu/>)
- Zebrafish---Zebrafish Information Network (<http://zfin.org/>)
- *Xenopus*---Xenbase (<http://www.xenbase.org/entry/>)
- *Drosophila*---FlyBase (<http://flybase.org/>)
- *C*. *elegans*---WormBase (<https://wormbase.org/>)

## Examples

> 'A construct was engineered for knockin of the *mi*R-128 (*mi*R-128-3p)
gene into the Rosa26 locus. Rosa26 genomic DNA fragments (\~1.1 kb and
\~4.3 kb 5′ and 3′ homology arms, respectively) were amplified from
C57BL/6 BAC DNA, cloned into the pBasicLNeoL vector sequentially by
in-fusion cloning, and confirmed by sequencing. The *mi*R-128 gene,
under the control of tetO-minimum promoter, was also cloned into the
vector between the two homology arms. In addition, the targeting
construct also contained a loxP sites flanking the neomycin resistance
gene cassette for positive selection and a diphtheria toxin A (DTA)
cassette for negative selection. The construct was linearized with ClaI
and electroporated into C57BL/6N ES cells. After G418 selection,
seven-positive clones were identified from 121 G418-resistant clones by
PCR screening. Six-positive clones were expanded and further analyzed by
Southern blot analysis, among which four clones were confirmed with
correct targeting with single-copy integration. Correctly targeted ES
cell clones were injected into blastocysts, and the blastocysts were
implanted into pseudo-pregnant mice to generate chimeras by Cyagen
Biosciences Inc. Chimeric males were bred with Cre deleted mice from
Jackson Laboratories to generate neomycin-free knockin mice. The correct
insertion of the *mi*R-128 cassette and successful removal of the
neomycin cassette were confirmed by PCR analysis with the primers listed
in Supplementary Table... ' [@pbio.3000411.ref119].

> 'The C57BL/6J (Jackson) mice were supplied by Charles River
Laboratories. The C57BL/6JOlaHsd (Harlan) mice were supplied by Harlan.
The α-synuclein knockout mice were kindly supplied by Prof.... (Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.) and were congenic C57BL/6JCrl
(backcrossed for 12 generations). TNFα−/− mice were kindly supplied by
Dr.... (Queens University, Belfast, Northern Ireland) and were inbred on
a homozygous C57BL/6J strain originally sourced from Bantin & Kingman
and generated by targeting C57BL/6 ES cells. T286A mice were obtained
from Prof.... (University of California, Los Angeles, CA). These mice
were originally congenic C57BL/6J (backcrossed for five generations) and
were then inbred (cousin matings) over 14 y, during which time they were
outbred with C57BL/6JOlaHsd mice on three separate occasions'
[@pbio.3000411.ref120].
