---
id: index-test-cut-offs-categories
title: "12. Index test and reference standard cut-offs or categories"
checklist: 
    text: |
        12a. Definition of and rationale for test positivity cut-offs or result categories of the index test, distinguishing prespecified from exploratory.

        12b. Definition of and rationale for test positivity cut-offs or result categories of the reference standard, distinguishing prespecified from exploratory.

---
## What to write

12a. Definition of and rationale for test positivity cut-offs or result categories of the index test, distinguishing prespecified from exploratory.

12b. Definition of and rationale for test positivity cut-offs or result categories of the reference standard, distinguishing prespecified from exploratory.

## Explanation

Test results in their original form can be dichotomous
(positive vs negative), have multiple categories (as in high,
intermediate or low risk) or be continuous (interval or ratio scale).

For tests with multiple categories, or continuous results, the outcomes
from testing are often reclassified into positive (disease confirmed)
and negative (disease excluded). This is performed by defining a
threshold: the test positivity cut-off. Results that exceed the
threshold would then be called positive index test results. In other
studies, an ROC curve is derived, by calculating the
sensitivity--specificity pairs for all possible cut-offs.

To evaluate the validity and applicability of these classifications,
readers would like to know these positivity cut-offs or result
categories, how they were determined and whether they were defined prior
to the study or after collecting the data. Prespecified thresholds can
be based on (1) previous studies, (2) cut-offs used in clinical
practice, (3) thresholds recommended by clinical practice guidelines or
(4) thresholds recommended by the manufacturer. If no such thresholds
exist, the authors may be tempted to explore the accuracy for various
thresholds after the data have been collected.

If the authors selected the positivity cut-off after performing the
test, choosing the one that maximised test performance, there is an
increased risk that the resulting accuracy estimates are overly
optimistic, especially in small studies.[@R48; @R49] Subsequent studies
may fail to replicate the findings.[@R50; @R51]

*In the example*, the authors stated the rationale for their selection
of cut-offs.

## Example

> 'We also compared the sensitivity of the risk-model at the
specificity that would correspond to using a fixed FIT [fecal
immunochemical test] positivity threshold of 50 ng/ml. We used a
threshold of 50 ng/ml because this was the anticipated cut-off for the
Dutch screening programme at the time of the study'.[@R47]
