---
id: indeterminate-results
title: "15. Indeterminate results"
---
## What to write

How indeterminate index test or reference standard results were handled.

## Explanation

Indeterminate results refer to those that are neither
positive or negative.[@R60] Such results can occur on the index test and
the reference standard, and are a challenge when evaluating the
performance of a diagnostic test.[@R60] The occurrence of indeterminate
test results varies from test to test, but frequencies up to 40% have
been reported.[@R62]

There are many underlying causes for indeterminate test results.[@R62]
[@R63] A test may fail because of technical reasons or an insufficient
sample, for example, in the absence of cells in a needle biopsy from a
tumour.[@R43; @R64; @R65] Sometimes test results are not reported as
just positive or negative, as in the case of ventilation--perfusion
scanning in suspected pulmonary embolism, where the findings are
classified in three categories: normal, high probability or
inconclusive.[@R66]

In itself, the frequency of indeterminate test results is an important
indicator of the feasibility of the test, and typically limits the
overall clinical usefulness; therefore, authors are encouraged to always
report the respective frequencies with reasons, as well as failures to
complete the testing procedure. This applies to the index test and the
reference standard.

Ignoring indeterminate test results can produce biased estimates of
accuracy, if these results do not occur at random. Clinical practice may
guide the decision on how to handle indeterminate results.

There are multiple ways for handling indeterminate test results in the
analysis when estimating accuracy and expressing test performance.[@R63]
They can be ignored altogether, be reported but not accounted for or
handled as a separate test result category. Handling these results as a
separate category may be useful when indeterminate results occur more
often, for example, in those without the target condition than in those
with the target condition. It is also possible to reclassify all such
results: as false positives or false negatives, depending on the
reference standard result ('worst-case scenario'), or as true positives
and true negatives ('best-case scenario').

*In the example*, the authors explicitly chose a conservative approach
by considering all indeterminate results from the index test as being
false-negative (in those with the target condition) or false-positive
(in all others), a strategy sometimes referred to as the 'worst-case
scenario'.

## Example

> 'Indeterminate results were considered false-positive or
false-negative and incorporated into the final analysis. For example, an
indeterminate result in a patient found to have appendicitis was
considered to have had a negative test result'.[@R59]
