---
id: limitations
title: "26. Limitations"
---
## What to write

Study limitations, including sources of potential bias, statistical uncertainty and generalisability.

## Explanation

Like other clinical trials and studies, diagnostic
accuracy studies are at risk of bias; they can generate estimates of the
test\'s accuracy that do not reflect the true performance of the test,
due to flaws or deficiencies in study design and analysis.[@R1; @R2] In
addition, imprecise accuracy estimates, with wide CIs, should be
interpreted with caution. Because of differences in design, participants
and procedures, the findings generated by one particular diagnostic
accuracy study may not be obtained in other conditions; their
generalisability may be limited.[@R102]

In the Discussion section, authors should critically reflect on the
validity of their findings, address potential limitations and elaborate
on why study findings may or may not be generalisable. As bias can come
down to overestimation or underestimation of the accuracy of the index
test under investigation, authors should discuss the direction of
potential bias, along with its likely magnitude. Readers are then
informed of the likelihood that the limitations jeopardise the study\'s
results and conclusions (see also Item 27).[@R103]

Some journals explicitly encourage authors to report on study
limitations, but many are not specific about which elements should be
addressed.[@R104] For diagnostic accuracy studies, we highly recommend
that at least potential sources of bias are discussed, as well as
imprecision, and concerns related to the selection of patients and the
setting in which the study was performed.

*In the example*, the authors identified two potential sources of bias
that are common in diagnostic accuracy studies: not all test results
were verified by the reference standard, and there was a time interval
between index test and reference standard, allowing the target condition
to change. They also discussed the magnitude of this potential bias, and
the direction: whether this may have led to overestimations or
underestimations of test accuracy.

## Example

'This study had limitations. First, not all patients who
underwent CT colonography (CTC) were assessed by the reference standard
methods. [...] However, considering that the 41 patients who were
eligible but did not undergo the reference standard procedures had
negative or only mildly positive CTC findings, excluding them from the
analysis of CTC diagnostic performance may have slightly overestimated
the sensitivity of CTC (ie, partial verification bias). Second, there
was a long time interval between CTC and the reference methods in some
patients, predominately those with negative CTC findings. [...] If
anything, the prolonged interval would presumably slightly underestimate
the sensitivity and NPV of CTC for non-cancerous lesions, since some
"missed" lesions could have conceivably developed or increased in size
since the time of CTC'.[@R101]
