---
id: background
title: "3. Background"
---
## What to write

Scientific and clinical background, including the intended use and clinical role of the index test.

## Explanation

In the introduction of scientific study reports,
authors should describe the rationale for their study. In doing so, they
can refer to previous work on the topic, remaining uncertainty and the
clinical implications of this knowledge gap. To help readers in
evaluating the implications of the study, authors can clarify the
intended use and the clinical role of the test under evaluation, which
is referred to as the index test.

The intended use of a test can be diagnosis, screening, staging,
monitoring, surveillance, prognosis, treatment selection or other
purposes.[@R18] The clinical role of the test under evaluation refers to
its anticipated position relative to other tests in the clinical
pathway.[@R19] A triage test, for example, will be used before an
existing test because it is less costly or burdensome, but often less
accurate as well. An add-on test will be used after existing tests, to
improve the accuracy of the total test strategy by identifying false
positives or false negatives of the initial test. In other cases, a new
test may be used to replace an existing test.

Defining the intended use and clinical role of the test will guide the
design of the study and the targeted level of sensitivity and
specificity; from these definitions follow the eligibility criteria, how
and where to identify eligible participants, how to perform tests and
how to interpret test results.[@R19]

Specifying the clinical role is helpful in assessing the relative
importance of potential errors (false positives and false negatives)
made by the index test. A triage test to rule out disease, for example,
will need very high sensitivity, whereas the one that mainly aims to
rule in disease will need very high specificity.

*In the example*, the intended use is diagnosis of knee fractures in
patients with acute knee injuries, and the potential clinical role is
triage test; radiography, the existing test, would only be performed in
those with a positive outcome of the newly developed decision rule. The
authors outline the current scientific and clinical background of the
health problem studied, and their reason for aiming to develop a triage
test: this would reduce the number of radiographs and, consequently,
healthcare costs.

## Example

> 'The need for improved efficiency in the use of emergency
department radiography has long been documented. This need for
selectivity has been identified clearly for patients with acute ankle
injury, who generally are all referred for radiography, despite a yield
for fracture of less than 15%. The referral patterns and yield of
radiography for patients with knee injuries have been less well
described but may be more inefficient than for patients with ankle
injuries. [...] The sheer volume of low-cost tests such as plain
radiography may contribute as much to rising health care costs as do
high-technology, low-volume procedures. [...] If validated in
subsequent studies, a decision rule for knee-injury patients could lead
to a large reduction in the use of knee radiography and significant
health care savings without compromising patient care'.[@R17]
