---
id: study-design
title: "5. Study design"
---
## What to write

Whether data collection was planned before the index test and reference standard were performed (prospective study) or after (retrospective study).

## Explanation

There is great variability in the way the terms
'prospective' and 'retrospective' are defined and used in the
literature. We believe it is therefore necessary to describe clearly
whether data collection was planned before the index test and reference
standard were performed, or afterwards. If authors define the study
question before index test and reference standards are performed, they
can take appropriate actions for optimising procedures according to the
study protocol and for dedicated data collection.[@R24]

Sometimes, the idea for a study originates when patients have already
undergone the index test and the reference standard. If so, data
collection relies on reviewing patient charts or extracting data from
registries. Though such retrospective studies can sometimes reflect
routine clinical practice better than prospective studies, they may fail
to identify all eligible patients, and often result in data of lower
quality, with more missing data points.[@R24] A reason for this could
be, for example, that in daily clinical practice, not all patients
undergoing the index test may proceed to have the reference standard.

*In the example*, the data were clearly collected retrospectively:
participants were identified through database screening, clinical data
were abstracted from patients\' medical records, though images were
reinterpreted.

## Example

> 'We reviewed our database of patients who underwent needle
localization and surgical excision with digital breast tomosynthesis
guidance from April 2011 through January 2013. [...] The patients'
medical records and images of the 36 identified lesions were then
reviewed retrospectively by an author with more than 5â€…years of breast
imaging experience after a breast imaging fellowship'.[@R23]
